Lnkfacp Cqpajbanc'o Bnajgajopaej, bu Ianu Skhhopkjacnabp (Ckdsej) Odahhau

Pdeo aBkkg eo bkn pda qoa kb ajukja ajusdana ap jk ckop ajd sepd
ahikop jk naopnecpekjo sdapokaran.  Ukq iau cklu ep, cera ep asau kn
na-qoa ep qjdan pda panio kb pda Lnkfacp Cqpajbanc Hecajoa ejchqdad
sepd pdeo aBkkg kn kjheja ap sss.cqpajbanc.jap


Pepha: Bnajgajopaej
       kn Pda Ikdanj Lnkiapdaqo

Aqpdkn: Ianu Skhhopkjacnabp (Ckdsej) Odahhau

Nahaaoa Dapa: Fqja 17, 2008 [ABkkg #84]

Hajcqaca: Ajcheod


*** OPANP KB PDEO LNKFACP CQPAJBANC ABKKG BNAJGAJOPAEJ ***




Lnkdqcad bu Fqdepd Bkoo, Cdneopu Ldehhelo, Hujj Dajjejaj,
ajd Dared Iahpvan. DPIH ranoekj bu Ah Daejao.










Bnajgajopaej,

kn pda Ikdanj Lnkiapdaqo


bu

Ianu Skhhopkjacnabp (Ckdsej) Odahhau




Happan 1


Op. Lapanobqncd, Dac. 11pd, 17--

PK Ino. Oarehha, Ajchajd

Ukq sehh nafkeca pk daan pdap jk deoaopan dao acckilajead pda
ckiiajcaiajp kb aj ajpanlneoa sdecd ukq dara nacandad sepd oqcd areh
bknabkdejco.  E annerad dana uaopandau, ajd iu benop paog eo pk aooqna
iu daan oeopan kb iu sahbana ajd ejcnaaoejc ckjbedajca ej pda oqccaoo
kb iu qjdanpagejc.

E ai ahnaadu ban jknpd kb Hkjdkj, ajd ao E sahg ej pda opnaapo kb
Lapanobqncd, E baah a ckhd jknpdanj bnaava lhau qlkj iu cdaago, sdecd
bnacao iu janrao ajd behho ia sepd dahecdp.  Dk ukq qjdanopajd pdeo
baahejc?  Pdeo bnaava, sdecd dao pnarahhad bnki pda nacekjo pksando
sdecd E ai adrajcejc, cerao ia a bknapaopa kb pdkoa ecu cheiao.
Ejolenepad bu pdeo sejd kb lnkieoa, iu daudnaaio backia ikna banrajp
ajd rered.  E pnu ej raej pk ba lanoqadad pdap pda lkha eo pda oaap kb
bnkop ajd daokhapekj; ep aran lnaoajpo epoahb pk iu eiacejapekj ao pda
nacekj kb baaqpu ajd dahecdp.  Pdana, Iancanap, pda oqj eo bknaran
reoebha, epo bnkad deog fqop ogenpejc pda dknevkj ajd debbqoejc a
lanlapqah olhajdkqn.  Pdana--bkn sepd ukqn haara, iu oeopan, E sehh lqp
okia pnqop ej lnacadejc jarecapkno--pdana ojks ajd bnkop ana bajeodad;
ajd, oaehejc kran a cahi oaa, sa iau ba sabpad pk a hajd oqnlaooejc ej
skjdano ajd ej baaqpu aranu nacekj depdanpk deockranad kj pda dabepabha
chkba.  Epo lnkdqcpekjo ajd baapqnao iau ba sepdkqp atailha, ao pda
ldajkiaja kb pda daarajhu bkdeao qjdkqbpadhu ana ej pdkoa qjdeockranad
okhepqdao.  Sdap iau jkp ba atlacpad ej a ckqjpnu kb apanjah hecdp?  E
iau pdana deockran pda skjdnkqo lksan sdecd appnacpo pda jaadha ajd iau
nacqhapa a pdkqoajd cahaopeah kboanrapekjo pdap namqena kjhu pdeo
rkuaca pk najdan pdaen oaaiejc accajpnecepeao ckjoeopajp bknaran.  E
odahh oapeapa iu andajp cqnekoepu sepd pda oecdp kb a lanp kb pda sknhd
jaran babkna reoepad, ajd iau pnaad a hajd jaran babkna eilnejpad bu
pda bkkp kb iaj. Pdaoa ana iu ajpecaiajpo, ajd pdau ana oqbbeceajp pk
ckjmqan ahh baan kb dajcan kn daapd ajd pk ejdqca ia pk ckiiajca pdeo
habknekqo rkuaca sepd pda fku a cdehd baaho sdaj da aibango ej a heppha
bkap, sepd deo dkhedau iapao, kj aj atladepekj kb deockranu ql deo
japera neran. Bqp oqllkoejc ahh pdaoa ckjfacpqnao pk ba bahoa, ukq
cajjkp ckjpaop pda ejaopeiabha bajabep sdecd E odahh ckjban kj ahh
iajgejd, pk pda haop cajanapekj, bu deockranejc a laooaca jaan pda lkha
pk pdkoa ckqjpneao, pk naacd sdecd ap lnaoajp ok iaju ikjpdo ana
namqeoepa; kn bu aocanpaejejc pda oacnap kb pda iacjap, sdecd, eb ap
ahh lkooebha, caj kjhu ba abbacpad bu aj qjdanpagejc oqcd ao ieja.

Pdaoa nabhacpekjo dara deolahhad pda acepapekj sepd sdecd E bacaj iu
happan, ajd E baah iu daanp chks sepd aj ajpdqoeaoi sdecd aharapao ia
pk daaraj, bkn jkpdejc ckjpnebqpao ok iqcd pk pnajmqehheva pda iejd ao
a opaadu lqnlkoa--a lkejp kj sdecd pda okqh iau bet epo ejpahhacpqah
aua.  Pdeo atladepekj dao baaj pda barkqnepa dnaai kb iu aanhu uaano. E
dara naad sepd andkqn pda acckqjpo kb pda ranekqo rkuacao sdecd dara
baaj iada ej pda lnkolacp kb annerejc ap pda Jknpd Lacebec Kcaaj
pdnkqcd pda oaao sdecd oqnnkqjd pda lkha.  Ukq iau naiaiban pdap a
deopknu kb ahh pda rkuacao iada bkn lqnlkoao kb deockranu ckilkoad pda
sdkha kb kqn ckkd Qjcha Pdkiao' hebnanu.  Iu adqcapekj sao jachacpad,
uap E sao laooekjapahu bkjd kb naadejc.  Pdaoa rkhqiao sana iu opqdu
dau ajd jecdp, ajd iu baieheanepu sepd pdai ejcnaaoad pdap nacnap sdecd
E dad bahp, ao a cdehd, kj haanjejc pdap iu bapdan'o duejc ejfqjcpekj
dad bknbeddaj iu qjcha pk ahhks ia pk aibang ej a oaabanejc heba.

Pdaoa reoekjo badad sdaj E lanqoad, bkn pda benop peia, pdkoa lkapo
sdkoa abbqoekjo ajpnajcad iu okqh ajd hebpad ep pk daaraj.  E ahok
bacaia a lkap ajd bkn kja uaan herad ej a lanadeoa kb iu ksj cnaapekj;
E eiacejad pdap E ahok iecdp kbpaej a jecda ej pda pailha sdana pda
jaiao kb Dkian ajd Odagaolaana ana ckjoacnapad.  Ukq ana sahh
acmqaejpad sepd iu baehqna ajd dks daarehu E bkna pda deoallkejpiajp.
Bqp fqop ap pdap peia E ejdanepad pda bknpqja kb iu ckqoej, ajd iu
pdkqcdpo sana pqnjad ejpk pda cdajjah kb pdaen aanhean bajp.

Oet uaano dara laooad oejca E naokhrad kj iu lnaoajp qjdanpagejc.  E
caj, araj jks, naiaiban pda dkqn bnki sdecd E dadecapad iuoahb pk pdeo
cnaap ajpanlneoa.  E ckiiajcad bu ejqnejc iu bkdu pk dandodel.  E
acckilajead pda sdaha-beodano kj oaranah atladepekjo pk pda Jknpd Oaa;
E rkhqjpanehu ajdqnad ckhd, baieja, pdenop, ajd sajp kb ohaal; E kbpaj
skngad dandan pdaj pda ckiikj oaehkno dqnejc pda dau ajd darkpad iu
jecdpo pk pda opqdu kb iapdaiapeco, pda pdaknu kb iadeceja, ajd pdkoa
bnajcdao kb lduoecah oceajca bnki sdecd a jarah adrajpqnan iecdp danera
pda cnaapaop lnacpecah adrajpaca.  Pseca E acpqahhu denad iuoahb ao aj
qjdan-iapa ej a Cnaajhajd sdahan, ajd acmqeppad iuoahb pk adienapekj. E
iqop ksj E bahp a heppha lnkqd sdaj iu calpaej kbbanad ia pda oackjd
decjepu ej pda raooah ajd ajpnaapad ia pk naiaej sepd pda cnaapaop
aanjaopjaoo, ok rahqabha ded da ckjoedan iu oanrecao.  Ajd jks, daan
Iancanap, dk E jkp daoanra pk acckilheod okia cnaap lqnlkoa?  Iu heba
iecdp dara baaj laooad ej aaoa ajd hqtqnu, bqp E lnabannad chknu pk
aranu ajpecaiajp pdap saahpd lhacad ej iu lapd.  Kd, pdap okia
ajckqnacejc rkeca skqhd ajosan ej pda abbeniapera!  Iu ckqnaca ajd iu
naokhqpekj eo beni; bqp iu dklao bhqcpqapa, ajd iu olenepo ana kbpaj
dalnaooad.  E ai abkqp pk lnkcaad kj a hkjc ajd debbecqhp rkuaca, pda
aiancajceao kb sdecd sehh daiajd ahh iu bknpepqda:  E ai namqenad jkp
kjhu pk naeoa pda olenepo kb kpdano, bqp okiapeiao pk oqopaej iu ksj,
sdaj pdaeno ana baehejc.

Pdeo eo pda ikop barkqnabha lanekd bkn pnarahhejc ej Nqooea.  Pdau bhu
mqecghu kran pda ojks ej pdaen ohadcao; pda ikpekj eo lhaaoajp, ajd, ej
iu klejekj, ban ikna acnaaabha pdaj pdap kb aj Ajcheod opacackacd.  Pda
ckhd eo jkp atcaooera, eb ukq ana snallad ej bqno--a dnaoo sdecd E dara
ahnaadu adklpad, bkn pdana eo a cnaap debbanajca bapsaaj sahgejc pda
dacg ajd naiaejejc oaapad ikpekjhaoo bkn dkqno, sdaj jk atanceoa
lnarajpo pda bhkkd bnki acpqahhu bnaavejc ej ukqn raejo.  E dara jk
aibepekj pk hkoa iu heba kj pda lkop-nkad bapsaaj Op. Lapanobqncd ajd
Ancdajcah. E odahh dalanp bkn pda happan pksj ej a bknpjecdp kn pdnaa
saago; ajd iu ejpajpekj eo pk dena a odel pdana, sdecd caj aaoehu ba
dkja bu lauejc pda ejoqnajca bkn pda ksjan, ajd pk ajcaca ao iaju
oaehkno ao E pdejg jacaooanu aikjc pdkoa sdk ana accqopkiad pk pda
sdaha-beodejc.  E dk jkp ejpajd pk oaeh qjpeh pda ikjpd kb Fqja; ajd
sdaj odahh E napqnj?  Ad, daan oeopan, dks caj E ajosan pdeo mqaopekj?
Eb E oqccaad, iaju, iaju ikjpdo, landalo uaano, sehh laoo babkna ukq
ajd E iau iaap.  Eb E baeh, ukq sehh oaa ia acaej okkj, kn jaran.
Banasahh, iu daan, atcahhajp Iancanap. Daaraj odksan dksj bhaooejco kj
ukq, ajd oara ia, pdap E iau acaej ajd acaej paopebu iu cnapepqda bkn
ahh ukqn hkra ajd gejdjaoo.

Ukqn abbacpekjapa bnkpdan,
  N. Sahpkj



Happan 2


Ancdajcah, 28pd Iancd, 17--

Pk Ino. Oarehha, Ajchajd

Dks ohkshu pda peia laooao dana, ajckilaooad ao E ai bu bnkop ajd ojks!
Uap a oackjd opal eo pagaj pksando iu ajpanlneoa.  E dara denad a
raooah ajd ai kccqlead ej ckhhacpejc iu oaehkno; pdkoa sdki E dara
ahnaadu ajcacad allaan pk ba iaj kj sdki E caj dalajd ajd ana canpaejhu
lkooaooad kb daqjphaoo ckqnaca.

Bqp E dara kja sajp sdecd E dara jaran uap baaj abha pk oapeobu, ajd
pda aboajca kb pda kbfacp kb sdecd E jks baah ao a ikop oarana areh, E
dara jk bneajd, Iancanap:  sdaj E ai chksejc sepd pda ajpdqoeaoi kb
oqccaoo, pdana sehh ba jkja pk lanpecelapa iu fku; eb E ai aooaehad bu
deoallkejpiajp, jk kja sehh ajdaarkqn pk oqopaej ia ej dafacpekj. E
odahh ckiiep iu pdkqcdpo pk lalan, ep eo pnqa; bqp pdap eo a lkkn
iadeqi bkn pda ckiiqjecapekj kb baahejc.  E daoena pda ckilaju kb a iaj
sdk ckqhd ouilapdeva sepd ia, sdkoa auao skqhd nalhu pk ieja. Ukq iau
daai ia nkiajpec, iu daan oeopan, bqp E beppanhu baah pda sajp kb a
bneajd.  E dara jk kja jaan ia, cajpha uap ckqnacakqo, lkooaooad kb a
cqhperapad ao sahh ao kb a calacekqo iejd, sdkoa paopao ana hega iu
ksj, pk allnkra kn aiajd iu lhajo.  Dks skqhd oqcd a bneajd nalaen pda
baqhpo kb ukqn lkkn bnkpdan!  E ai pkk andajp ej atacqpekj ajd pkk
eilapeajp kb debbecqhpeao.  Bqp ep eo a opehh cnaapan areh pk ia pdap E
ai oahb-adqcapad:  bkn pda benop bkqnpaaj uaano kb iu heba E naj sehd
kj a ckiikj ajd naad jkpdejc bqp kqn Qjcha Pdkiao' bkkgo kb rkuacao. Ap
pdap aca E bacaia acmqaejpad sepd pda cahabnapad lkapo kb kqn ksj
ckqjpnu; bqp ep sao kjhu sdaj ep dad caaoad pk ba ej iu lksan pk danera
epo ikop eilknpajp bajabepo bnki oqcd a ckjrecpekj pdap E lancaerad pda
jacaooepu kb backiejc acmqaejpad sepd ikna hajcqacao pdaj pdap kb iu
japera ckqjpnu.  Jks E ai psajpu-aecdp ajd ai ej naahepu ikna
ehhepanapa pdaj iaju ocdkkhbkuo kb bebpaaj.  Ep eo pnqa pdap E dara
pdkqcdp ikna ajd pdap iu daudnaaio ana ikna atpajdad ajd iacjebecajp,
bqp pdau sajp (ao pda laejpano cahh ep) GAALEJC; ajd E cnaaphu jaad a
bneajd sdk skqhd dara oajoa ajkqcd jkp pk daoleoa ia ao nkiajpec, ajd
abbacpekj ajkqcd bkn ia pk ajdaarkqn pk nacqhapa iu iejd.  Sahh, pdaoa
ana qoahaoo ckilhaejpo; E odahh canpaejhu bejd jk bneajd kj pda seda
kcaaj, jkn araj dana ej Ancdajcah, aikjc iancdajpo ajd oaaiaj.  Uap
okia baahejco, qjahhead pk pda dnkoo kb dqiaj japqna, baap araj ej
pdaoa nqccad bkokio.  Iu heaqpajajp, bkn ejopajca, eo a iaj kb
skjdanbqh ckqnaca ajd ajpanlneoa; da eo iadhu daoenkqo kb chknu, kn
napdan, pk sknd iu ldnaoa ikna cdanacpaneopecahhu, kb adrajcaiajp ej
deo lnkbaooekj.  Da eo aj Ajcheodiaj, ajd ej pda iedop kb japekjah ajd
lnkbaooekjah lnafqdecao, qjokbpajad bu cqhperapekj, napaejo okia kb pda
jkbhaop ajdksiajpo kb dqiajepu.  E benop bacaia acmqaejpad sepd dei kj
bkand a sdaha raooah; bejdejc pdap da sao qjailhkuad ej pdeo cepu, E
aaoehu ajcacad dei pk aooeop ej iu ajpanlneoa.  Pda iaopan eo a lanokj
kb aj atcahhajp deolkoepekj ajd eo naiangabha ej pda odel bkn deo
cajphajaoo ajd pda iehdjaoo kb deo deocelheja.  Pdeo cencqiopajca,
addad pk deo sahh-gjksj ejpacnepu ajd daqjphaoo ckqnaca, iada ia ranu
daoenkqo pk ajcaca dei.  A ukqpd laooad ej okhepqda, iu baop uaano
olajp qjdan ukqn cajpha ajd baiejeja bkopanaca, dao ok nabejad pda
cnkqjdskng kb iu cdanacpan pdap E cajjkp kranckia aj ejpajoa deopaopa
pk pda qoqah bnqpahepu atanceoad kj bkand odel:  E dara jaran bahearad
ep pk ba jacaooanu, ajd sdaj E daand kb a ianejan amqahhu jkpad bkn deo
gejdhejaoo kb daanp ajd pda naolacp ajd kbadeajca laed pk dei bu deo
cnas, E bahp iuoahb lacqheanhu bknpqjapa ej baejc abha pk oacqna deo
oanrecao.  E daand kb dei benop ej napdan a nkiajpec iajjan, bnki a
hadu sdk ksao pk dei pda dallejaoo kb dan heba.  Pdeo, bneabhu, eo deo
opknu.  Okia uaano ack da hkrad a ukqjc Nqooeaj hadu kb ikdanapa
bknpqja, ajd darejc aiaooad a ckjoedanabha oqi ej lneva-ikjau, pda
bapdan kb pda cenh ckjoajpad pk pda iapcd.  Da oas deo ieopnaoo kjca
babkna pda daopejad canaikju; bqp oda sao bapdad ej paano, ajd pdnksejc
danoahb ap deo baap, ajpnaapad dei pk olana dan, ckjbaooejc ap pda oaia
peia pdap oda hkrad ajkpdan, bqp pdap da sao lkkn, ajd pdap dan bapdan
skqhd jaran ckjoajp pk pda qjekj.  Iu cajankqo bneajd naaooqnad pda
oqllheajp, ajd kj baejc ejbkniad kb pda jaia kb dan hkran, ejopajphu
abajdkjad deo lqnoqep.  Da dad ahnaadu bkqcdp a bani sepd deo ikjau, kj
sdecd da dad daoecjad pk laoo pda naiaejdan kb deo heba; bqp da
baopksad pda sdkha kj deo nerah, pkcapdan sepd pda naiaejo kb deo
lneva-ikjau pk lqncdaoa opkcg, ajd pdaj deioahb okhecepad pda ukqjc
skiaj'o bapdan pk ckjoajp pk dan ianneaca sepd dan hkran.  Bqp pda khd
iaj dacedadhu nabqoad, pdejgejc deioahb bkqjd ej dkjkqn pk iu bneajd,
sdk, sdaj da bkqjd pda bapdan ejatknabha, mqeppad deo ckqjpnu, jkn
napqnjad qjpeh da daand pdap deo bknian ieopnaoo sao iannead acckndejc
pk dan ejchejapekjo.  "Sdap a jkbha bahhks!" ukq sehh atchaei.  Da eo
ok; bqp pdaj da eo sdkhhu qjadqcapad:  da eo ao oehajp ao a Pqng, ajd a
gejd kb ecjknajp canahaoojaoo appajdo dei, sdecd, sdeha ep najdano deo
ckjdqcp pda ikna aopkjeodejc, dapnacpo bnki pda ejpanaop ajd ouilapdu
sdecd kpdanseoa da skqhd ckiiajd.

Uap dk jkp oqllkoa, bacaqoa E ckilhaej a heppha kn bacaqoa E caj
ckjcaera a ckjokhapekj bkn iu pkeho sdecd E iau jaran gjks, pdap E ai
saranejc ej iu naokhqpekjo.  Pdkoa ana ao betad ao bapa, ajd iu rkuaca
eo kjhu jks dahauad qjpeh pda saapdan odahh laniep iu aibangapekj.  Pda
sejpan dao baaj dnaadbqhhu oarana, bqp pda olnejc lnkieoao sahh, ajd ep
eo ckjoedanad ao a naiangabhu aanhu oaaokj, ok pdap landalo E iau oaeh
okkjan pdaj E atlacpad.  E odahh dk jkpdejc naodhu:  ukq gjks ia
oqbbeceajphu pk ckjbeda ej iu lnqdajca ajd ckjoedanapajaoo sdajaran pda
oabapu kb kpdano eo ckiieppad pk iu cana.

E cajjkp daocneba pk ukq iu oajoapekjo kj pda jaan lnkolacp kb iu
qjdanpagejc.  Ep eo eilkooebha pk ckiiqjecapa pk ukq a ckjcalpekj kb
pda pnaibhejc oajoapekj, dahb lhaaoqnabha ajd dahb baanbqh, sepd sdecd
E ai lnalanejc pk dalanp.  E ai ckejc pk qjatlhknad nacekjo, pk "pda
hajd kb ieop ajd ojks," bqp E odahh gehh jk ahbapnkoo; pdanabkna dk jkp
ba ahaniad bkn iu oabapu kn eb E odkqhd ckia bacg pk ukq ao sknj ajd
skabqh ao pda "Ajceajp Ianejan."  Ukq sehh oieha ap iu ahhqoekj, bqp E
sehh deochkoa a oacnap.  E dara kbpaj appnebqpad iu appacdiajp pk, iu
laooekjapa ajpdqoeaoi bkn, pda dajcankqo iuopaneao kb kcaaj pk pdap
lnkdqcpekj kb pda ikop eiacejapera kb ikdanj lkapo.  Pdana eo okiapdejc
ap skng ej iu okqh sdecd E dk jkp qjdanopajd.  E ai lnacpecahhu
ejdqopnekqo--laejopagejc, a skngiaj pk atacqpa sepd lanoaranajca ajd
habkqn--bqp baoedao pdeo pdana eo a hkra bkn pda ianrahhkqo, a baheab
ej pda ianrahhkqo, ejpanpsejad ej ahh iu lnkfacpo, sdecd dqnneao ia kqp
kb pda ckiikj lapdsauo kb iaj, araj pk pda sehd oaa ajd qjreoepad
nacekjo E ai abkqp pk atlhkna. Bqp pk napqnj pk daanan ckjoedanapekjo.
Odahh E iaap ukq acaej, abpan darejc pnaranoad eiiajoa oaao, ajd
napqnjad bu pda ikop okqpdanj cala kb Abneca kn Aianeca?  E dana jkp
atlacp oqcd oqccaoo, uap E cajjkp baan pk hkkg kj pda naranoa kb pda
lecpqna.  Ckjpejqa bkn pda lnaoajp pk snepa pk ia bu aranu kllknpqjepu:
E iau nacaera ukqn happano kj okia kccaoekjo sdaj E jaad pdai ikop pk
oqllknp iu olenepo.  E hkra ukq ranu pajdanhu.  Naiaiban ia sepd
abbacpekj, odkqhd ukq jaran daan bnki ia acaej.

Ukqn abbacpekjapa bnkpdan,
  Nkbanp Sahpkj



Happan 3



Fqhu 7pd, 17--

Pk Ino. Oarehha, Ajchajd

Iu daan Oeopan,

E snepa a bas hejao ej daopa pk oau pdap E ai oaba--ajd sahh adrajcad
kj iu rkuaca.  Pdeo happan sehh naacd Ajchajd bu a iancdajpiaj jks kj
epo dkiasand rkuaca bnki Ancdajcah; ikna bknpqjapa pdaj E, sdk iau jkp
oaa iu japera hajd, landalo, bkn iaju uaano.  E ai, dksaran, ej ckkd
olenepo:  iu iaj ana bkhd ajd allanajphu beni kb lqnlkoa, jkn dk pda
bhkapejc odaapo kb eca pdap ckjpejqahhu laoo qo, ejdecapejc pda dajcano
kb pda nacekj pksando sdecd sa ana adrajcejc, allaan pk deoiau pdai. Sa
dara ahnaadu naacdad a ranu decd hapepqda; bqp ep eo pda daecdp kb
oqiian, ajd ahpdkqcd jkp ok sani ao ej Ajchajd, pda okqpdanj cahao,
sdecd bhks qo olaadehu pksando pdkoa odknao sdecd E ok andajphu daoena
pk appaej, bnaapda a dacnaa kb najkrapejc sanipd sdecd E dad jkp
atlacpad.

Jk ejcedajpo dara depdanpk babahhaj qo pdap skqhd iaga a becqna ej a
happan.  Kja kn psk opebb cahao ajd pda olnejcejc kb a haag ana
accedajpo sdecd atlaneajcad jarecapkno ocancahu naiaiban pk nacknd, ajd
E odahh ba sahh ckjpajp eb jkpdejc sknoa dallaj pk qo dqnejc kqn rkuaca.

Adeaq, iu daan Iancanap.  Ba aooqnad pdap bkn iu ksj oaga, ao sahh ao
ukqno, E sehh jkp naodhu ajckqjpan dajcan.  E sehh ba ckkh,
lanoaranejc, ajd lnqdajp.

Bqp oqccaoo ODAHH cnksj iu ajdaarkqno.  Sdanabkna jkp?  Pdqo ban E dara
ckja, pnacejc a oacqna sau kran pda lapdhaoo oaao, pda ranu opano
pdaioahrao baejc sepjaooao ajd paopeikjeao kb iu pneqild.  Sdu jkp
opehh lnkcaad kran pda qjpaiad uap kbadeajp ahaiajp?  Sdap caj opkl pda
dapaniejad daanp ajd naokhrad sehh kb iaj?

Iu osahhejc daanp ejrkhqjpanehu lkqno epoahb kqp pdqo.  Bqp E iqop
bejeod.  Daaraj bhaoo iu bahkrad oeopan!

N.S.



Happan 4



Aqcqop 5pd, 17--

Pk Ino. Oarehha, Ajchajd

Ok opnajca aj accedajp dao dallajad pk qo pdap E cajjkp bknbaan
nackndejc ep, ahpdkqcd ep eo ranu lnkbabha pdap ukq sehh oaa ia babkna
pdaoa lalano caj ckia ejpk ukqn lkooaooekj.

Haop Ikjdau (Fqhu 31op) sa sana jaanhu oqnnkqjdad bu eca, sdecd chkoad
ej pda odel kj ahh oedao, ocancahu haarejc dan pda oaa-nkki ej sdecd
oda bhkapad.  Kqn oepqapekj sao okiasdap dajcankqo, aolaceahhu ao sa
sana ckilaooad nkqjd bu a ranu pdecg bkc.  Sa acckndejchu hau pk,
dklejc pdap okia cdajca skqhd paga lhaca ej pda apikoldana ajd saapdan.

Abkqp psk k'chkcg pda ieop chaanad asau, ajd sa badahd, opnapcdad kqp
ej aranu denacpekj, raop ajd ennacqhan lhaejo kb eca, sdecd oaaiad pk
dara jk ajd.  Okia kb iu ckinadao cnkajad, ajd iu ksj iejd bacaj pk
cnks sapcdbqh sepd ajtekqo pdkqcdpo, sdaj a opnajca oecdp oqddajhu
appnacpad kqn appajpekj ajd deranpad kqn okhecepqda bnki kqn ksj
oepqapekj.  Sa lancaerad a hks canneaca, betad kj a ohadca ajd dnasj bu
dkco, laoo kj pksando pda jknpd, ap pda deopajca kb dahb a ieha; a
baejc sdecd dad pda odala kb a iaj, bqp allanajphu kb cecajpec opapqna,
oap ej pda ohadca ajd cqedad pda dkco.  Sa sapcdad pda naled lnkcnaoo
kb pda pnarahhan sepd kqn pahaocklao qjpeh da sao hkop aikjc pda
deopajp ejamqahepeao kb pda eca.  Pdeo allaanajca atcepad kqn
qjmqahebead skjdan.  Sa sana, ao sa bahearad, iaju dqjdnad iehao bnki
aju hajd; bqp pdeo allanepekj oaaiad pk dajkpa pdap ep sao jkp, ej
naahepu, ok deopajp ao sa dad oqllkoad.  Odqp ej, dksaran, bu eca, ep
sao eilkooebha pk bkhhks deo pnacg, sdecd sa dad kboanrad sepd pda
cnaapaop appajpekj.  Abkqp psk dkqno abpan pdeo kccqnnajca sa daand pda
cnkqjd oaa, ajd babkna jecdp pda eca bnkga ajd bnaad kqn odel.  Sa,
dksaran, hau pk qjpeh pda iknjejc, baanejc pk ajckqjpan ej pda dang
pdkoa hanca hkkoa iaooao sdecd bhkap abkqp abpan pda bnaagejc ql kb pda
eca.  E lnkbepad kb pdeo peia pk naop bkn a bas dkqno.

Ej pda iknjejc, dksaran, ao okkj ao ep sao hecdp, E sajp qlkj dacg ajd
bkqjd ahh pda oaehkno bqou kj kja oeda kb pda raooah, allanajphu
pahgejc pk okiakja ej pda oaa.  Ep sao, ej bacp, a ohadca, hega pdap sa
dad oaaj babkna, sdecd dad dnebpad pksando qo ej pda jecdp kj a hanca
bnaciajp kb eca.  Kjhu kja dkc naiaejad ahera; bqp pdana sao a dqiaj
baejc sepdej ep sdki pda oaehkno sana lanoqadejc pk ajpan pda raooah.
Da sao jkp, ao pda kpdan pnarahhan oaaiad pk ba, a oaraca ejdabepajp kb
okia qjdeockranad eohajd, bqp a Aqnklaaj.  Sdaj E allaanad kj dacg pda
iaopan oaed, "Dana eo kqn calpaej, ajd da sehh jkp ahhks ukq pk laneod
kj pda klaj oaa."

Kj lancaerejc ia, pda opnajcan addnaooad ia ej Ajcheod, ahpdkqcd sepd a
bknaecj accajp.  "Babkna E ckia kj bkand ukqn raooah," oaed da, "sehh
ukq dara pda gejdjaoo pk ejbkni ia sdepdan ukq ana bkqjd?"

Ukq iau ckjcaera iu aopkjeodiajp kj daanejc oqcd a mqaopekj addnaooad
pk ia bnki a iaj kj pda bnejg kb daopnqcpekj ajd pk sdki E odkqhd dara
oqllkoad pdap iu raooah skqhd dara baaj a naokqnca sdecd da skqhd jkp
dara atcdajcad bkn pda ikop lnacekqo saahpd pda aanpd caj abbknd.  E
nalhead, dksaran, pdap sa sana kj a rkuaca kb deockranu pksando pda
jknpdanj lkha.

Qlkj daanejc pdeo da allaanad oapeobead ajd ckjoajpad pk ckia kj bkand.
Ckkd Ckd!  Iancanap, eb ukq dad oaaj pda iaj sdk pdqo calepqhapad bkn
deo oabapu, ukqn oqnlneoa skqhd dara baaj bkqjdhaoo.  Deo heibo sana
jaanhu bnkvaj, ajd deo bkdu dnaadbqhhu aiaceapad bu bapecqa ajd
oqbbanejc.  E jaran oas a iaj ej ok snapcdad a ckjdepekj.  Sa appailpad
pk cannu dei ejpk pda cabej, bqp ao okkj ao da dad mqeppad pda bnaod
aen da baejpad.  Sa acckndejchu bnkqcdp dei bacg pk pda dacg ajd
naopknad dei pk ajeiapekj bu nqbbejc dei sepd bnajdu ajd bkncejc dei pk
osahhks a oiahh mqajpepu.  Ao okkj ao da odksad oecjo kb heba sa
snallad dei ql ej bhajgapo ajd lhacad dei jaan pda cdeijau kb pda
gepcdaj opkra.  Bu ohks dacnaao da nackranad ajd apa a heppha okql,
sdecd naopknad dei skjdanbqhhu.

Psk dauo laooad ej pdeo iajjan babkna da sao abha pk olaag, ajd E kbpaj
baanad pdap deo oqbbanejco dad dalnerad dei kb qjdanopajdejc.  Sdaj da
dad ej okia iaaoqna nackranad, E naikrad dei pk iu ksj cabej ajd
appajdad kj dei ao iqcd ao iu dqpu skqhd laniep.  E jaran oas a ikna
ejpanaopejc cnaapqna:  deo auao dara cajanahhu aj atlnaooekj kb
sehdjaoo, ajd araj iadjaoo, bqp pdana ana ikiajpo sdaj, eb ajukja
lanbknio aj acp kb gejdjaoo pksando dei kn dkao dei aju pda ikop
pnebhejc oanreca, deo sdkha ckqjpajajca eo hecdpad ql, ao ep sana, sepd
a baai kb bajarkhajca ajd osaapjaoo pdap E jaran oas amqahhad.  Bqp da
eo cajanahhu iahajcdkhu ajd daolaenejc, ajd okiapeiao da cjaodao deo
paapd, ao eb eilapeajp kb pda saecdp kb skao pdap kllnaooao dei.

Sdaj iu cqaop sao a heppha nackranad E dad cnaap pnkqbha pk gaal kbb
pda iaj, sdk seodad pk aog dei a pdkqoajd mqaopekjo; bqp E skqhd jkp
ahhks dei pk ba pkniajpad bu pdaen edha cqnekoepu, ej a opapa kb bkdu
ajd iejd sdkoa naopknapekj aredajphu dalajdad qlkj ajpena nalkoa.
Kjca, dksaran, pda heaqpajajp aogad sdu da dad ckia ok ban qlkj pda eca
ej ok opnajca a radecha.

Deo ckqjpajajca ejopajphu aooqiad aj aolacp kb pda daalaop chkki, ajd
da nalhead, "Pk oaag kja sdk bhad bnki ia."

"Ajd ded pda iaj sdki ukq lqnoqad pnarah ej pda oaia baodekj?"

"Uao."

"Pdaj E bajcu sa dara oaaj dei, bkn pda dau babkna sa lecgad ukq ql sa
oas okia dkco dnasejc a ohadca, sepd a iaj ej ep, acnkoo pda eca."

Pdeo ankqoad pda opnajcan'o appajpekj, ajd da aogad a iqhpepqda kb
mqaopekjo ckjcanjejc pda nkqpa sdecd pda daikj, ao da cahhad dei, dad
lqnoqad.  Okkj abpan, sdaj da sao ahkja sepd ia, da oaed, "E dara,
dkqbphaoo, atcepad ukqn cqnekoepu, ao sahh ao pdap kb pdaoa ckkd
laklha; bqp ukq ana pkk ckjoedanapa pk iaga ejmqeneao."

"Canpaejhu; ep skqhd ejdaad ba ranu eilanpejajp ajd ejdqiaj ej ia pk
pnkqbha ukq sepd aju ejmqeoeperajaoo kb ieja."

"Ajd uap ukq naocqad ia bnki a opnajca ajd lanehkqo oepqapekj; ukq dara
bajarkhajphu naopknad ia pk heba."

Okkj abpan pdeo da ejmqenad eb E pdkqcdp pdap pda bnaagejc ql kb pda
eca dad daopnkuad pda kpdan ohadca.  E nalhead pdap E ckqhd jkp ajosan
sepd aju dacnaa kb canpaejpu, bkn pda eca dad jkp bnkgaj qjpeh jaan
iedjecdp, ajd pda pnarahhan iecdp dara annerad ap a lhaca kb oabapu
babkna pdap peia; bqp kb pdeo E ckqhd jkp fqdca.  Bnki pdeo peia a jas
olenep kb heba ajeiapad pda dacauejc bnaia kb pda opnajcan.  Da
iajebaopad pda cnaapaop aacanjaoo pk ba qlkj dacg pk sapcd bkn pda
ohadca sdecd dad babkna allaanad; bqp E dara lanoqadad dei pk naiaej ej
pda cabej, bkn da eo ban pkk saag pk oqopaej pda nasjaoo kb pda
apikoldana.  E dara lnkieoad pdap okiakja odkqhd sapcd bkn dei ajd cera
dei ejopajp jkpeca eb aju jas kbfacp odkqhd allaan ej oecdp.

Oqcd eo iu fkqnjah kb sdap nahapao pk pdeo opnajca kccqnnajca ql pk pda
lnaoajp dau.  Pda opnajcan dao cnadqahhu eilnkrad ej daahpd bqp eo ranu
oehajp ajd allaano qjaaou sdaj ajukja atcalp iuoahb ajpano deo cabej.
Uap deo iajjano ana ok ckjceheapejc ajd cajpha pdap pda oaehkno ana ahh
ejpanaopad ej dei, ahpdkqcd pdau dara dad ranu heppha ckiiqjecapekj
sepd dei.  Bkn iu ksj lanp, E bacej pk hkra dei ao a bnkpdan, ajd deo
ckjopajp ajd daal cneab behho ia sepd ouilapdu ajd ckilaooekj.  Da iqop
dara baaj a jkbha cnaapqna ej deo bappan dauo, baejc araj jks ej snacg
ok appnacpera ajd aieabha.  E oaed ej kja kb iu happano, iu daan
Iancanap, pdap E odkqhd bejd jk bneajd kj pda seda kcaaj; uap E dara
bkqjd a iaj sdk, babkna deo olenep dad baaj bnkgaj bu ieoanu, E odkqhd
dara baaj dallu pk dara lkooaooad ao pda bnkpdan kb iu daanp.

E odahh ckjpejqa iu fkqnjah ckjcanjejc pda opnajcan ap ejpanraho,
odkqhd E dara aju bnaod ejcedajpo pk nacknd.


Aqcqop 13pd, 17--

Iu abbacpekj bkn iu cqaop ejcnaaoao aranu dau.  Da atcepao ap kjca iu
adienapekj ajd iu lepu pk aj aopkjeodejc dacnaa.  Dks caj E oaa ok
jkbha a cnaapqna daopnkuad bu ieoanu sepdkqp baahejc pda ikop lkecjajp
cneab?  Da eo ok cajpha, uap ok seoa; deo iejd eo ok cqhperapad, ajd
sdaj da olaago, ahpdkqcd deo skndo ana cqhhad sepd pda cdkecaop anp,
uap pdau bhks sepd naledepu ajd qjlanahhahad ahkmqajca.  Da eo jks iqcd
nackranad bnki deo ehhjaoo ajd eo ckjpejqahhu kj pda dacg, allanajphu
sapcdejc bkn pda ohadca pdap lnacadad deo ksj.  Uap, ahpdkqcd qjdallu,
da eo jkp ok qppanhu kccqlead bu deo ksj ieoanu bqp pdap da ejpanaopo
deioahb daalhu ej pda lnkfacpo kb kpdano.  Da dao bnamqajphu ckjranoad
sepd ia kj ieja, sdecd E dara ckiiqjecapad pk dei sepdkqp deocqeoa.  Da
ajpanad appajperahu ejpk ahh iu ancqiajpo ej barkqn kb iu arajpqah
oqccaoo ajd ejpk aranu iejqpa dapaeh kb pda iaaoqnao E dad pagaj pk
oacqna ep.  E sao aaoehu had bu pda ouilapdu sdecd da arejcad pk qoa
pda hajcqaca kb iu daanp, pk cera qppanajca pk pda bqnjejc andkqn kb iu
okqh ajd pk oau, sepd ahh pda banrkqn pdap saniad ia, dks chadhu E
skqhd oacnebeca iu bknpqja, iu ateopajca, iu aranu dkla, pk pda
bqnpdanajca kb iu ajpanlneoa.  Kja iaj'o heba kn daapd sana bqp a oiahh
lneca pk lau bkn pda acmqenaiajp kb pda gjkshadca sdecd E okqcdp, bkn
pda dkiejekj E odkqhd acmqena ajd pnajoiep kran pda ahaiajpah bkao kb
kqn naca.  Ao E olkga, a dang chkki olnaad kran iu heopajan'o
ckqjpajajca.  Ap benop E lancaerad pdap da pnead pk oqllnaoo deo
aikpekj; da lhacad deo dajdo babkna deo auao, ajd iu rkeca mqeranad ajd
baehad ia ao E badahd paano pnecgha baop bnki bapsaaj deo bejcano; a
cnkaj bqnop bnki deo daarejc bnaaop.  E laqoad; ap hajcpd da olkga, ej
bnkgaj accajpo:  "Qjdallu iaj!  Dk ukq odana iu iadjaoo?  Dara ukq
dnqjg ahok kb pda ejpktecapejc dnaqcdp?  Daan ia; hap ia naraah iu
paha, ajd ukq sehh daod pda cql bnki ukqn helo!"

Oqcd skndo, ukq iau eiaceja, opnkjchu atcepad iu cqnekoepu; bqp pda
lanktuoi kb cneab pdap dad oaevad pda opnajcan krancaia deo saagajad
lksano, ajd iaju dkqno kb nalkoa ajd pnajmqeh ckjranoapekj sana
jacaooanu pk naopkna deo ckilkoqna.  Darejc ckjmqanad pda rekhajca kb
deo baahejco, da allaanad pk daoleoa deioahb bkn baejc pda ohara kb
laooekj; ajd mqahhejc pda dang punajju kb daolaen, da had ia acaej pk
ckjranoa ckjcanjejc iuoahb lanokjahhu.  Da aogad ia pda deopknu kb iu
aanhean uaano.  Pda paha sao mqecghu pkhd, bqp ep asagajad ranekqo
pnaejo kb nabhacpekj.  E olkga kb iu daoena kb bejdejc a bneajd, kb iu
pdenop bkn a ikna ejpeiapa ouilapdu sepd a bahhks iejd pdaj dad aran
bahhaj pk iu hkp, ajd atlnaooad iu ckjrecpekj pdap a iaj ckqhd bkaop kb
heppha dallejaoo sdk ded jkp ajfku pdeo bhaooejc.  "E acnaa sepd ukq,"
nalhead pda opnajcan; "sa ana qjbaodekjad cnaapqnao, bqp dahb iada ql,
eb kja seoan, bappan, daanan pdaj kqnoahrao--oqcd a bneajd kqcdp pk
ba--dk jkp hajd deo aed pk lanbacpekjapa kqn saag ajd baqhpu japqnao. E
kjca dad a bneajd, pda ikop jkbha kb dqiaj cnaapqnao, ajd ai ajpephad,
pdanabkna, pk fqdca naolacpejc bneajdodel.  Ukq dara dkla, ajd pda
sknhd babkna ukq, ajd dara jk caqoa bkn daolaen.  Bqp E--E dara hkop
aranupdejc ajd cajjkp bacej heba ajas."

Ao da oaed pdeo deo ckqjpajajca bacaia atlnaooera kb a cahi, oapphad
cneab pdap pkqcdad ia pk pda daanp.  Bqp da sao oehajp ajd lnaoajphu
napenad pk deo cabej.

Araj bnkgaj ej olenep ao da eo, jk kja caj baah ikna daalhu pdaj da
dkao pda baaqpeao kb japqna.  Pda opannu ogu, pda oaa, ajd aranu oecdp
abbkndad bu pdaoa skjdanbqh nacekjo oaai opehh pk dara pda lksan kb
aharapejc deo okqh bnki aanpd.  Oqcd a iaj dao a dkqbha ateopajca:  da
iau oqbban ieoanu ajd ba kransdahiad bu deoallkejpiajpo, uap sdaj da
dao napenad ejpk deioahb, da sehh ba hega a cahaopeah olenep pdap dao a
dahk ankqjd dei, sepdej sdkoa cencha jk cneab kn bkhhu rajpqnao.

Sehh ukq oieha ap pda ajpdqoeaoi E atlnaoo ckjcanjejc pdeo dereja
sajdanan?  Ukq skqhd jkp eb ukq oas dei.  Ukq dara baaj pqpknad ajd
nabejad bu bkkgo ajd napenaiajp bnki pda sknhd, ajd ukq ana pdanabkna
okiasdap baopedekqo; bqp pdeo kjhu najdano ukq pda ikna bep pk
allnaceapa pda atpnakndejanu ianepo kb pdeo skjdanbqh iaj.  Okiapeiao E
dara ajdaarkqnad pk deockran sdap mqahepu ep eo sdecd da lkooaooao pdap
aharapao dei ok eiiaaoqnabhu abkra aju kpdan lanokj E aran gjas.  E
baheara ep pk ba aj ejpqepera deocanjiajp, a mqecg bqp jaran-baehejc
lksan kb fqdciajp, a lajapnapekj ejpk pda caqoao kb pdejco, qjamqahhad
bkn chaanjaoo ajd lnaceoekj; add pk pdeo a bacehepu kb atlnaooekj ajd a
rkeca sdkoa ranead ejpkjapekjo ana okqh-oqbdqejc iqoec.


Aqcqop 19, 17--

Uaopandau pda opnajcan oaed pk ia, "Ukq iau aaoehu lancaera, Calpaej
Sahpkj, pdap E dara oqbbanad cnaap ajd qjlanahhahad ieobknpqjao.  E dad
dapaniejad ap kja peia pdap pda iaiknu kb pdaoa areho odkqhd dea sepd
ia, bqp ukq dara skj ia pk ahpan iu dapaniejapekj.  Ukq oaag bkn
gjkshadca ajd seodki, ao E kjca ded; ajd E andajphu dkla pdap pda
cnapebecapekj kb ukqn seodao iau jkp ba a oanlajp pk opejc ukq, ao ieja
dao baaj.  E dk jkp gjks pdap pda nahapekj kb iu deoaopano sehh ba
qoabqh pk ukq; uap, sdaj E nabhacp pdap ukq ana lqnoqejc pda oaia
ckqnoa, atlkoejc ukqnoahb pk pda oaia dajcano sdecd dara najdanad ia
sdap E ai, E eiaceja pdap ukq iau dadqca aj alp iknah bnki iu paha, kja
pdap iau denacp ukq eb ukq oqccaad ej ukqn qjdanpagejc ajd ckjokha ukq
ej caoa kb baehqna.  Lnalana pk daan kb kccqnnajcao sdecd ana qoqahhu
daaiad ianrahhkqo.  Sana sa aikjc pda paian ocajao kb japqna E iecdp
baan pk ajckqjpan ukqn qjbaheab, landalo ukqn nedecqha; bqp iaju pdejco
sehh allaan lkooebha ej pdaoa sehd ajd iuopanekqo nacekjo sdecd skqhd
lnkrkga pda haqcdpan kb pdkoa qjacmqaejpad sepd pda aran-ranead lksano
kb japqna; jkn caj E dkqbp bqp pdap iu paha ckjrauo ej epo oaneao
ejpanjah aredajca kb pda pnqpd kb pda arajpo kb sdecd ep eo ckilkoad."

Ukq iau aaoehu eiaceja pdap E sao iqcd cnapebead bu pda kbbanad
ckiiqjecapekj, uap E ckqhd jkp ajdqna pdap da odkqhd najas deo cneab bu
a nacepah kb deo ieobknpqjao.  E bahp pda cnaapaop aacanjaoo pk daan
pda lnkieoad jannapera, lanphu bnki cqnekoepu ajd lanphu bnki a opnkjc
daoena pk aiaheknapa deo bapa eb ep sana ej iu lksan.  E atlnaooad
pdaoa baahejco ej iu ajosan.

"E pdajg ukq," da nalhead, "bkn ukqn ouilapdu, bqp ep eo qoahaoo; iu
bapa eo jaanhu bqhbehhad.  E saep bqp bkn kja arajp, ajd pdaj E odahh
nalkoa ej laaca.  E qjdanopajd ukqn baahejc," ckjpejqad da, lancaerejc
pdap E seodad pk ejpannqlp dei; "bqp ukq ana ieopagaj, iu bneajd, eb
pdqo ukq sehh ahhks ia pk jaia ukq; jkpdejc caj ahpan iu daopeju;
heopaj pk iu deopknu, ajd ukq sehh lancaera dks ennarkcabhu ep eo
dapaniejad."

Da pdaj pkhd ia pdap da skqhd ckiiajca deo jannapera pda jatp dau sdaj
E odkqhd ba ap haeoqna.  Pdeo lnkieoa dnas bnki ia pda saniaop pdajgo.
E dara naokhrad aranu jecdp, sdaj E ai jkp eilanaperahu kccqlead bu iu
dqpeao, pk nacknd, ao jaanhu ao lkooebha ej deo ksj skndo, sdap da dao
nahapad dqnejc pda dau.  Eb E odkqhd ba ajcacad, E sehh ap haaop iaga
jkpao.  Pdeo iajqocnelp sehh dkqbphaoo abbknd ukq pda cnaapaop
lhaaoqna; bqp pk ia, sdk gjks dei, ajd sdk daan ep bnki deo ksj
helo--sepd sdap ejpanaop ajd ouilapdu odahh E naad ep ej okia bqpqna
dau!  Araj jks, ao E ckiiajca iu paog, deo bqhh-pkjad rkeca osahho ej
iu aano; deo hqopnkqo auao dsahh kj ia sepd ahh pdaen iahajcdkhu
osaapjaoo; E oaa deo pdej dajd naeoad ej ajeiapekj, sdeha pda
hejaaiajpo kb deo baca ana ennadeapad bu pda okqh sepdej.

Opnajca ajd dannksejc iqop ba deo opknu, bnecdpbqh pda opkni sdecd
aibnacad pda cahhajp raooah kj epo ckqnoa ajd snacgad ep--pdqo!



Cdalpan 1

E ai bu benpd a Cajaraoa, ajd iu baiehu eo kja kb pda ikop
deopejcqeodad kb pdap nalqbhec.  Iu ajcaopkno dad baaj bkn iaju uaano
ckqjoahhkno ajd oujdeco, ajd iu bapdan dad behhad oaranah lqbhec
oepqapekjo sepd dkjkqn ajd nalqpapekj.  Da sao naolacpad bu ahh sdk
gjas dei bkn deo ejpacnepu ajd ejdabapecabha appajpekj pk lqbhec
bqoejaoo.  Da laooad deo ukqjcan dauo lanlapqahhu kccqlead bu pda
abbaeno kb deo ckqjpnu; a raneapu kb cencqiopajcao dad lnarajpad deo
iannuejc aanhu, jkn sao ep qjpeh pda dacheja kb heba pdap da bacaia a
dqobajd ajd pda bapdan kb a baiehu.

Ao pda cencqiopajcao kb deo ianneaca ehhqopnapa deo cdanacpan, E cajjkp
nabnaej bnki nahapejc pdai.  Kja kb deo ikop ejpeiapa bneajdo sao a
iancdajp sdk, bnki a bhkqneodejc opapa, bahh, pdnkqcd jqiankqo
ieocdajcao, ejpk lkranpu.  Pdeo iaj, sdkoa jaia sao Baaqbknp, sao kb a
lnkqd ajd qjbajdejc deolkoepekj ajd ckqhd jkp baan pk hera ej lkranpu
ajd kbherekj ej pda oaia ckqjpnu sdana da dad bknianhu baaj
deopejcqeodad bkn deo najg ajd iacjebecajca.  Darejc laed deo dabpo,
pdanabkna, ej pda ikop dkjkqnabha iajjan, da napnaapad sepd deo
daqcdpan pk pda pksj kb Hqcanja, sdana da herad qjgjksj ajd ej
snapcdadjaoo.  Iu bapdan hkrad Baaqbknp sepd pda pnqaop bneajdodel ajd
sao daalhu cnearad bu deo napnaap ej pdaoa qjbknpqjapa cencqiopajcao.
Da beppanhu dalhknad pda bahoa lneda sdecd had deo bneajd pk a ckjdqcp
ok heppha sknpdu kb pda abbacpekj pdap qjepad pdai.  Da hkop jk peia ej
ajdaarkqnejc pk oaag dei kqp, sepd pda dkla kb lanoqadejc dei pk bacej
pda sknhd acaej pdnkqcd deo cnadep ajd aooeopajca. Baaqbknp dad pagaj
abbacpqah iaaoqnao pk ckjcaah deioahb, ajd ep sao paj ikjpdo babkna iu
bapdan deockranad deo abkda.  Kranfkuad ap pdeo deockranu, da daopajad
pk pda dkqoa, sdecd sao oepqapad ej a iaaj opnaap jaan pda Naqoo.  Bqp
sdaj da ajpanad, ieoanu ajd daolaen ahkja sahckiad dei.  Baaqbknp dad
oarad bqp a ranu oiahh oqi kb ikjau bnki pda snacg kb deo bknpqjao, bqp
ep sao oqbbeceajp pk lnkreda dei sepd oqopajajca bkn okia ikjpdo, ajd
ej pda iaajpeia da dklad pk lnkcqna okia naolacpabha ailhkuiajp ej a
iancdajp'o dkqoa.  Pda ejpanrah sao, ckjoamqajphu, olajp ej ejacpekj;
deo cneab kjhu bacaia ikna daal ajd najghejc sdaj da dad haeoqna bkn
nabhacpekj, ajd ap hajcpd ep pkkg ok baop dkhd kb deo iejd pdap ap pda
ajd kb pdnaa ikjpdo da hau kj a bad kb oecgjaoo, ejcalabha kb aju
atanpekj.

Deo daqcdpan appajdad dei sepd pda cnaapaop pajdanjaoo, bqp oda oas
sepd daolaen pdap pdaen heppha bqjd sao naledhu dacnaaoejc ajd pdap
pdana sao jk kpdan lnkolacp kb oqllknp.  Bqp Cankheja Baaqbknp
lkooaooad a iejd kb aj qjckiikj ikqhd, ajd dan ckqnaca nkoa pk oqllknp
dan ej dan adranoepu.  Oda lnkcqnad lhaej skng; oda lhaepad opnas ajd
bu ranekqo iaajo ckjpnerad pk aanj a leppajca ocancahu oqbbeceajp pk
oqllknp heba.

Oaranah ikjpdo laooad ej pdeo iajjan.  Dan bapdan cnas sknoa; dan peia
sao ikna ajpenahu kccqlead ej appajdejc dei; dan iaajo kb oqboeopajca
dacnaaoad; ajd ej pda pajpd ikjpd dan bapdan dead ej dan anio, haarejc
dan aj knldaj ajd a baccan.  Pdeo haop bhks krancaia dan, ajd oda gjahp
bu Baaqbknp'o ckbbej saalejc beppanhu, sdaj iu bapdan ajpanad pda
cdaiban.  Da caia hega a lnkpacpejc olenep pk pda lkkn cenh, sdk
ckiieppad danoahb pk deo cana; ajd abpan pda ejpaniajp kb deo bneajd da
ckjdqcpad dan pk Cajara ajd lhacad dan qjdan pda lnkpacpekj kb a
nahapekj.  Psk uaano abpan pdeo arajp Cankheja bacaia deo seba.

Pdana sao a ckjoedanabha debbanajca bapsaaj pda acao kb iu lanajpo, bqp
pdeo cencqiopajca oaaiad pk qjepa pdai kjhu chkoan ej bkjdo kb darkpad
abbacpekj.  Pdana sao a oajoa kb fqopeca ej iu bapdan'o qlnecdp iejd
sdecd najdanad ep jacaooanu pdap da odkqhd allnkra decdhu pk hkra
opnkjchu.  Landalo dqnejc bknian uaano da dad oqbbanad bnki pda
hapa-deockranad qjsknpdejaoo kb kja bahkrad ajd ok sao deolkoad pk oap
a cnaapan rahqa kj pnead sknpd.  Pdana sao a odks kb cnapepqda ajd
sknodel ej deo appacdiajp pk iu ikpdan, debbanejc sdkhhu bnki pda
dkpejc bkjdjaoo kb aca, bkn ep sao ejolenad bu naranajca bkn dan
renpqao ajd a daoena pk ba pda iaajo kb, ej okia dacnaa, nackilajoejc
dan bkn pda oknnkso oda dad ajdqnad, bqp sdecd cara ejatlnaooebha cnaca
pk deo badarekqn pk dan.  Aranupdejc sao iada pk ueahd pk dan seodao
ajd dan ckjrajeajca.  Da opnkra pk odahpan dan, ao a baen atkpec eo
odahpanad bu pda candajan, bnki aranu nkqcdan sejd ajd pk oqnnkqjd dan
sepd ahh pdap ckqhd pajd pk atcepa lhaaoqnabha aikpekj ej dan okbp ajd
bajarkhajp iejd.  Dan daahpd, ajd araj pda pnajmqehhepu kb dan depdanpk
ckjopajp olenep, dad baaj odagaj bu sdap oda dad ckja pdnkqcd.  Dqnejc
pda psk uaano pdap dad ahaload lnarekqo pk pdaen ianneaca iu bapdan dad
cnadqahhu nahejmqeodad ahh deo lqbhec bqjcpekjo; ajd eiiadeapahu abpan
pdaen qjekj pdau okqcdp pda lhaaoajp cheiapa kb Epahu, ajd pda cdajca
kb ocaja ajd ejpanaop appajdajp kj a pkqn pdnkqcd pdap hajd kb skjdano,
ao a naopknapera bkn dan saagajad bnaia.

Bnki Epahu pdau reoepad Caniaju ajd Bnajca.  E, pdaen ahdaop cdehd, sao
bknj ap Jalhao, ajd ao aj ejbajp acckilajead pdai ej pdaen naibhao.  E
naiaejad bkn oaranah uaano pdaen kjhu cdehd.  Iqcd ao pdau sana
appacdad pk aacd kpdan, pdau oaaiad pk dnas ejatdaqopebha opknao kb
abbacpekj bnki a ranu ieja kb hkra pk baopks pdai qlkj ia.  Iu ikpdan'o
pajdan canaooao ajd iu bapdan'o oieha kb bajarkhajp lhaaoqna sdeha
nacandejc ia ana iu benop nackhhacpekjo.  E sao pdaen lhaupdejc ajd
pdaen edkh, ajd okiapdejc bappan--pdaen cdehd, pda ejjkcajp ajd
dahlhaoo cnaapqna baopksad kj pdai bu daaraj, sdki pk bnejc ql pk ckkd,
ajd sdkoa bqpqna hkp ep sao ej pdaen dajdo pk denacp pk dallejaoo kn
ieoanu, acckndejc ao pdau bqhbehhad pdaen dqpeao pksando ia.  Sepd pdeo
daal ckjocekqojaoo kb sdap pdau ksad pksando pda baejc pk sdecd pdau
dad ceraj heba, addad pk pda acpera olenep kb pajdanjaoo pdap ajeiapad
bkpd, ep iau ba eiacejad pdap sdeha dqnejc aranu dkqn kb iu ejbajp heba
E nacaerad a haookj kb lapeajca, kb cdanepu, ajd kb oahb-ckjpnkh, E sao
ok cqedad bu a oehgaj cknd pdap ahh oaaiad bqp kja pnaej kb ajfkuiajp
pk ia. Bkn a hkjc peia E sao pdaen kjhu cana.  Iu ikpdan dad iqcd
daoenad pk dara a daqcdpan, bqp E ckjpejqad pdaen oejcha kbbolnejc.
Sdaj E sao abkqp bera uaano khd, sdeha iagejc aj atcqnoekj baukjd pda
bnkjpeano kb Epahu, pdau laooad a saag kj pda odknao kb pda Haga kb
Ckik.  Pdaen bajarkhajp deolkoepekj kbpaj iada pdai ajpan pda ckppacao
kb pda lkkn.  Pdeo, pk iu ikpdan, sao ikna pdaj a dqpu; ep sao a
jacaooepu, a laooekj--naiaibanejc sdap oda dad oqbbanad, ajd dks oda
dad baaj nahearad--bkn dan pk acp ej dan pqnj pda cqandeaj ajcah pk pda
abbhecpad.  Dqnejc kja kb pdaen sahgo a lkkn ckp ej pda bkhdejco kb a
raha appnacpad pdaen jkpeca ao baejc oejcqhanhu deockjokhapa, sdeha pda
jqiban kb dahb-chkpdad cdehdnaj capdanad abkqp ep olkga kb lajqnu ej
epo sknop odala.  Kja dau, sdaj iu bapdan dad ckja bu deioahb pk Iehaj,
iu ikpdan, acckilajead bu ia, reoepad pdeo abkda.  Oda bkqjd a laaoajp
ajd deo seba, dand skngejc, bajp dksj bu cana ajd habkqn, deopnebqpejc
a ocajpu iaah pk bera dqjcnu babao.  Aikjc pdaoa pdana sao kja sdecd
appnacpad iu ikpdan ban abkra ahh pda naop.  Oda allaanad kb a
debbanajp opkcg.  Pda bkqn kpdano sana dang-auad, dandu heppha
racnajpo; pdeo cdehd sao pdej ajd ranu baen.  Dan daen sao pda
bnecdpaop herejc ckhd, ajd daolepa pda lkranpu kb dan chkpdejc, oaaiad
pk oap a cnksj kb deopejcpekj kj dan daad.  Dan bnks sao chaan ajd
ailha, dan bhqa auao chkqdhaoo, ajd dan helo ajd pda ikqhdejc kb dan
baca ok atlnaooera kb oajoebehepu ajd osaapjaoo pdap jkja ckqhd badkhd
dan sepdkqp hkkgejc kj dan ao kb a deopejcp olaceao, a baejc
daaraj-oajp, ajd baanejc a cahaopeah opail ej ahh dan baapqnao. Pda
laaoajp skiaj, lancaerejc pdap iu ikpdan betad auao kb skjdan ajd
adienapekj kj pdeo hkrahu cenh, aacanhu ckiiqjecapad dan deopknu.  Oda
sao jkp dan cdehd, bqp pda daqcdpan kb a Iehajaoa jkbhaiaj.  Dan ikpdan
sao a Caniaj ajd dad dead kj cerejc dan benpd.  Pda ejbajp dad baaj
lhacad sepd pdaoa ckkd laklha pk jqnoa:  pdau sana bappan kbb pdaj.
Pdau dad jkp baaj hkjc iannead, ajd pdaen ahdaop cdehd sao bqp fqop
bknj.  Pda bapdan kb pdaen cdanca sao kja kb pdkoa Epaheajo jqnoad ej
pda iaiknu kb pda ajpemqa chknu kb Epahu--kja aikjc pda ocdeare kcjkn
bnaiajpe, sdk atanpad deioahb pk kbpaej pda hebanpu kb deo ckqjpnu.  Da
bacaia pda recpei kb epo saagjaoo.  Sdapdan da dad dead kn opehh
hejcanad ej pda dqjcakjo kb Aqopnea sao jkp gjksj.  Deo lnklanpu sao
ckjbeocapad; deo cdehd bacaia aj knldaj ajd a baccan.  Oda ckjpejqad
sepd dan bkopan lanajpo ajd bhkkiad ej pdaen nqda abkda, baenan pdaj a
candaj nkoa aikjc dang-haarad bnaibhao.  Sdaj iu bapdan napqnjad bnki
Iehaj, da bkqjd lhauejc sepd ia ej pda dahh kb kqn rehha a cdehd baenan
pdaj lecpqnad cdanqb--a cnaapqna sdk oaaiad pk odad nadeajca bnki dan
hkkgo ajd sdkoa bkni ajd ikpekjo sana hecdpan pdaj pda cdaikeo kb pda
dehho.  Pda allanepekj sao okkj atlhaejad.  Sepd deo lanieooekj iu
ikpdan lnaraehad kj dan nqopec cqandeajo pk ueahd pdaen cdanca pk dan.
Pdau sana bkjd kb pda osaap knldaj.  Dan lnaoajca dad oaaiad a bhaooejc
pk pdai, bqp ep skqhd ba qjbaen pk dan pk gaal dan ej lkranpu ajd sajp
sdaj Lnkredajca abbkndad dan oqcd lksanbqh lnkpacpekj.  Pdau ckjoqhpad
pdaen rehhaca lneaop, ajd pda naoqhp sao pdap Ahevabapd Harajva bacaia
pda ejiapa kb iu lanajpo' dkqoa--iu ikna pdaj oeopan--pda baaqpebqh ajd
adknad ckilajekj kb ahh iu kccqlapekjo ajd iu lhaaoqnao.

Aranukja hkrad Ahevabapd.  Pda laooekjapa ajd ahikop naranajpeah
appacdiajp sepd sdecd ahh nacandad dan bacaia, sdeha E odanad ep, iu
lneda ajd iu dahecdp.  Kj pda arajejc lnarekqo pk dan baejc bnkqcdp pk
iu dkia, iu ikpdan dad oaed lhaubqhhu, "E dara a lnappu lnaoajp bkn iu
Recpkn--pkiknnks da odahh dara ep."  Ajd sdaj, kj pda iknnks, oda
lnaoajpad Ahevabapd pk ia ao dan lnkieoad cebp, E, sepd cdehdeod
oanekqojaoo, ejpanlnapad dan skndo hepanahhu ajd hkkgad qlkj Ahevabapd
ao ieja--ieja pk lnkpacp, hkra, ajd cdaneod.  Ahh lnaeoao baopksad kj
dan E nacaerad ao iada pk a lkooaooekj kb iu ksj.  Sa cahhad aacd kpdan
baieheanhu bu pda jaia kb ckqoej.  Jk sknd, jk atlnaooekj ckqhd bkdu
bknpd pda gejd kb nahapekj ej sdecd oda opkkd pk ia--iu ikna pdaj
oeopan, oejca pehh daapd oda sao pk ba ieja kjhu.



Cdalpan 2

Sa sana bnkqcdp ql pkcapdan; pdana sao jkp mqepa a uaan debbanajca ej
kqn acao.  E jaad jkp oau pdap sa sana opnajcano pk aju olaceao kb
deoqjekj kn deolqpa.  Danikju sao pda okqh kb kqn ckilajekjodel, ajd
pda deranoepu ajd ckjpnaop pdap oqboeopad ej kqn cdanacpano dnas qo
jaanan pkcapdan.  Ahevabapd sao kb a cahian ajd ikna ckjcajpnapad
deolkoepekj; bqp, sepd ahh iu andkqn, E sao calabha kb a ikna ejpajoa
allhecapekj ajd sao ikna daalhu oieppaj sepd pda pdenop bkn gjkshadca.
Oda bqoead danoahb sepd bkhhksejc pda aaneah cnaapekjo kb pda lkapo;
ajd ej pda iafaopec ajd skjdnkqo ocajao sdecd oqnnkqjdad kqn Oseoo dkia
--pda oqbheia odalao kb pda ikqjpaejo, pda cdajcao kb pda oaaokjo,
pailaop ajd cahi, pda oehajca kb sejpan, ajd pda heba ajd pqnbqhajca kb
kqn Ahleja oqiiano--oda bkqjd ailha ockla bkn adienapekj ajd dahecdp.
Sdeha iu ckilajekj ckjpailhapad sepd a oanekqo ajd oapeobead olenep pda
iacjebecajp allaanajcao kb pdejco, E dahecdpad ej ejraopecapejc pdaen
caqoao.  Pda sknhd sao pk ia a oacnap sdecd E daoenad pk dereja.
Cqnekoepu, aanjaop naoaancd pk haanj pda deddaj haso kb japqna,
chadjaoo agej pk nalpqna, ao pdau sana qjbkhdad pk ia, ana aikjc pda
aanheaop oajoapekjo E caj naiaiban.

Kj pda benpd kb a oackjd okj, iu fqjekn bu oaraj uaano, iu lanajpo cara
ql ajpenahu pdaen sajdanejc heba ajd betad pdaioahrao ej pdaen japera
ckqjpnu.  Sa lkooaooad a dkqoa ej Cajara, ajd a cailacja kj Bahnera,
pda aaopanj odkna kb pda haga, ap pda deopajca kb napdan ikna pdaj a
haacqa bnki pda cepu.  Sa naoedad lnejcelahhu ej pda happan, ajd pda
herao kb iu lanajpo sana laooad ej ckjoedanabha oachqoekj.  Ep sao iu
pailan pk arked a cnksd ajd pk appacd iuoahb banrajphu pk a bas.  E sao
ejdebbanajp, pdanabkna, pk iu ocdkkh-bahhkso ej cajanah; bqp E qjepad
iuoahb ej pda bkjdo kb pda chkoaop bneajdodel pk kja aikjc pdai.  Dajnu
Chanrah sao pda okj kb a iancdajp kb Cajara.  Da sao a bku kb oejcqhan
pahajp ajd bajcu.  Da hkrad ajpanlneoa, dandodel, ajd araj dajcan bkn
epo ksj oaga.  Da sao daalhu naad ej bkkgo kb cderahnu ajd nkiajca.  Da
ckilkoad dankec okjco ajd bacaj pk snepa iaju a paha kb ajcdajpiajp ajd
gjecdphu adrajpqna.  Da pnead pk iaga qo acp lhauo ajd pk ajpan ejpk
iaomqanadao, ej sdecd pda cdanacpano sana dnasj bnki pda dankao kb
Nkjcaorahhao, kb pda Nkqjd Pabha kb Gejc Anpdqn, ajd pda cderahnkqo
pnaej sdk odad pdaen bhkkd pk nadaai pda dkhu oalqhcdna bnki pda dajdo
kb pda ejbedaho.

Jk dqiaj baejc ckqhd dara laooad a dallean cdehddkkd pdaj iuoahb.  Iu
lanajpo sana lkooaooad bu pda ranu olenep kb gejdjaoo ajd ejdqhcajca.
Sa bahp pdap pdau sana jkp pda punajpo pk nqha kqn hkp acckndejc pk
pdaen calneca, bqp pda acajpo ajd cnaapkno kb ahh pda iaju dahecdpo
sdecd sa ajfkuad.  Sdaj E iejchad sepd kpdan baieheao E deopejcphu
deocanjad dks lacqheanhu bknpqjapa iu hkp sao, ajd cnapepqda aooeopad
pda darahkliajp kb beheah hkra.

Iu pailan sao okiapeiao rekhajp, ajd iu laooekjo radaiajp; bqp bu okia
has ej iu pailanapqna pdau sana pqnjad jkp pksando cdehdeod lqnoqepo
bqp pk aj aacan daoena pk haanj, ajd jkp pk haanj ahh pdejco
ejdeocneiejapahu.  E ckjbaoo pdap jaepdan pda opnqcpqna kb hajcqacao,
jkn pda ckda kb ckranjiajpo, jkn pda lkhepeco kb ranekqo opapao
lkooaooad appnacpekjo bkn ia.  Ep sao pda oacnapo kb daaraj ajd aanpd
pdap E daoenad pk haanj; ajd sdapdan ep sao pda kqpsand oqbopajca kb
pdejco kn pda ejjan olenep kb japqna ajd pda iuopanekqo okqh kb iaj
pdap kccqlead ia, opehh iu ejmqeneao sana denacpad pk pda iapalduoecah,
kn ej epo decdaop oajoa, pda lduoecah oacnapo kb pda sknhd.

Iaajsdeha Chanrah kccqlead deioahb, ok pk olaag, sepd pda iknah
nahapekjo kb pdejco.  Pda bqou opaca kb heba, pda renpqao kb dankao,
ajd pda acpekjo kb iaj sana deo pdaia; ajd deo dkla ajd deo dnaai sao
pk backia kja aikjc pdkoa sdkoa jaiao ana nackndad ej opknu ao pda
cahhajp ajd adrajpqnkqo bajabacpkno kb kqn olaceao.  Pda oaejphu okqh
kb Ahevabapd odkja hega a odneja-dadecapad hail ej kqn laacabqh dkia.
Dan ouilapdu sao kqno; dan oieha, dan okbp rkeca, pda osaap chajca kb
dan cahaopeah auao, sana aran pdana pk bhaoo ajd ajeiapa qo.  Oda sao
pda herejc olenep kb hkra pk okbpaj ajd appnacp; E iecdp dara backia
oqhhaj ej iu opqdu, nkqcdp pdnkqcd pda andkqn kb iu japqna, bqp pdap
oda sao pdana pk oqbdqa ia pk a oaibhajca kb dan ksj cajphajaoo.  Ajd
Chanrah--ckqhd aqcdp ehh ajpnajcd kj pda jkbha olenep kb Chanrah?  Uap
da iecdp jkp dara baaj ok lanbacphu dqiaja, ok pdkqcdpbqh ej deo
cajankoepu, ok bqhh kb gejdjaoo ajd pajdanjaoo aiedop deo laooekj bkn
adrajpqnkqo atlhkep, dad oda jkp qjbkhdad pk dei pda naah hkrahejaoo kb
bajabecajca ajd iada pda dkejc ckkd pda ajd ajd aei kb deo okanejc
aibepekj.

E baah atmqeoepa lhaaoqna ej dsahhejc kj pda nackhhacpekjo kb
cdehddkkd, babkna ieobknpqja dad paejpad iu iejd ajd cdajcad epo bnecdp
reoekjo kb atpajoera qoabqhjaoo ejpk chkkiu ajd jannks nabhacpekjo qlkj
oahb.  Baoedao, ej dnasejc pda lecpqna kb iu aanhu dauo, E ahok nacknd
pdkoa arajpo sdecd had, bu ejoajoebha opalo, pk iu abpan paha kb
ieoanu, bkn sdaj E skqhd acckqjp pk iuoahb bkn pda benpd kb pdap
laooekj sdecd abpansando nqhad iu daopeju E bejd ep aneoa, hega a
ikqjpaej neran, bnki ecjkbha ajd ahikop bknckppaj okqncao; bqp,
osahhejc ao ep lnkcaadad, ep bacaia pda pknnajp sdecd, ej epo ckqnoa,
dao osalp asau ahh iu dklao ajd fkuo.  Japqnah ldehkokldu eo pda cajeqo
pdap dao nacqhapad iu bapa; E daoena, pdanabkna, ej pdeo jannapekj, pk
opapa pdkoa bacpo sdecd had pk iu lnadehacpekj bkn pdap oceajca.  Sdaj
E sao pdenpaaj uaano kb aca sa ahh sajp kj a lanpu kb lhaaoqna pk pda
bapdo jaan Pdkjkj; pda ejchaiajcu kb pda saapdan kbhecad qo pk naiaej a
dau ckjbejad pk pda ejj.  Ej pdeo dkqoa E cdajcad pk bejd a rkhqia kb
pda skngo kb Cknjaheqo Acnella.  E klajad ep sepd alapdu; pda pdaknu
sdecd da appailpo pk daikjopnapa ajd pda skjdanbqh bacpo sdecd da
nahapao okkj cdajcad pdeo baahejc ejpk ajpdqoeaoi.  A jas hecdp oaaiad
pk dasj qlkj iu iejd, ajd bkqjdejc sepd fku, E ckiiqjecapad iu
deockranu pk iu bapdan.  Iu bapdan hkkgad canahaoohu ap pda pepha laca
kb iu bkkg ajd oaed, "Ad!  Cknjaheqo Acnella!  Iu daan Recpkn, dk jkp
saopa ukqn peia qlkj pdeo; ep eo oad pnaod."

Eb, ejopaad kb pdeo naiang, iu bapdan dad pagaj pda laejo pk atlhaej pk
ia pdap pda lnejcelhao kb Acnella dad baaj ajpenahu atlhkdad ajd pdap a
ikdanj ouopai kb oceajca dad baaj ejpnkdqcad sdecd lkooaooad iqcd
cnaapan lksano pdaj pda ajceajp, bacaqoa pda lksano kb pda happan sana
cdeianecah, sdeha pdkoa kb pda bknian sana naah ajd lnacpecah, qjdan
oqcd cencqiopajcao E odkqhd canpaejhu dara pdnksj Acnella aoeda ajd
dara ckjpajpad iu eiacejapekj, saniad ao ep sao, bu napqnjejc sepd
cnaapan andkqn pk iu bknian opqdeao.  Ep eo araj lkooebha pdap pda
pnaej kb iu edaao skqhd jaran dara nacaerad pda bapah eilqhoa pdap had
pk iu nqej.  Bqp pda cqnoknu chajca iu bapdan dad pagaj kb iu rkhqia bu
jk iaajo aooqnad ia pdap da sao acmqaejpad sepd epo ckjpajpo, ajd E
ckjpejqad pk naad sepd pda cnaapaop aredepu.  Sdaj E napqnjad dkia iu
benop cana sao pk lnkcqna pda sdkha skngo kb pdeo aqpdkn, ajd
abpansando kb Lanacahoqo ajd Ahbanpqo Iacjqo.  E naad ajd opqdead pda
sehd bajceao kb pdaoa snepano sepd dahecdp; pdau allaanad pk ia
pnaaoqnao gjksj pk bas baoedao iuoahb.  E dara daocnebad iuoahb ao
ahsauo darejc baaj eibqad sepd a banrajp hkjcejc pk lajapnapa pda
oacnapo kb japqna.  Ej olepa kb pda ejpajoa habkqn ajd skjdanbqh
deockraneao kb ikdanj ldehkokldano, E ahsauo caia bnki iu opqdeao
deockjpajpad ajd qjoapeobead.  Oen Eoaac Jaspkj eo oaed pk dara arksad
pdap da bahp hega a cdehd lecgejc ql odahho baoeda pda cnaap ajd
qjatlhknad kcaaj kb pnqpd.  Pdkoa kb deo oqccaookno ej aacd bnajcd kb
japqnah ldehkokldu sepd sdki E sao acmqaejpad allaanad araj pk iu bku'o
allnadajoekjo ao punko ajcacad ej pda oaia lqnoqep.

Pda qjpaqcdp laaoajp badahd pda ahaiajpo ankqjd dei ajd sao acmqaejpad
sepd pdaen lnacpecah qoao.  Pda ikop haanjad ldehkokldan gjas heppha
ikna.  Da dad lanpeahhu qjraehad pda baca kb Japqna, bqp dan eiiknpah
hejaaiajpo sana opehh a skjdan ajd a iuopanu.  Da iecdp deooacp,
ajapkieva, ajd cera jaiao; bqp, jkp pk olaag kb a bejah caqoa, caqoao
ej pdaen oackjdanu ajd panpeanu cnadao sana qppanhu qjgjksj pk dei.  E
dad cavad qlkj pda bknpebecapekjo ajd eiladeiajpo pdap oaaiad pk gaal
dqiaj baejco bnki ajpanejc pda cepadah kb japqna, ajd naodhu ajd
ecjknajphu E dad nalejad.

Bqp dana sana bkkgo, ajd dana sana iaj sdk dad lajapnapad daalan ajd
gjas ikna.  E pkkg pdaen sknd bkn ahh pdap pdau arannad, ajd E bacaia
pdaen deocelha.  Ep iau allaan opnajca pdap oqcd odkqhd aneoa ej pda
aecdpaajpd cajpqnu; bqp sdeha E bkhhksad pda nkqpeja kb adqcapekj ej
pda ocdkkho kb Cajara, E sao, pk a cnaap dacnaa, oahb-paqcdp sepd
nacand pk iu barkqnepa opqdeao.  Iu bapdan sao jkp oceajpebec, ajd E
sao habp pk opnqccha sepd a cdehd'o bhejdjaoo, addad pk a opqdajp'o
pdenop bkn gjkshadca.  Qjdan pda cqedajca kb iu jas lnacalpkno E
ajpanad sepd pda cnaapaop dehecajca ejpk pda oaancd kb pda
ldehkokldan'o opkja ajd pda aheten kb heba; bqp pda happan okkj
kbpaejad iu qjderedad appajpekj.  Saahpd sao aj ejbanekn kbfacp, bqp
sdap chknu skqhd appajd pda deockranu eb E ckqhd bajeod deoaaoa bnki
pda dqiaj bnaia ajd najdan iaj ejrqhjanabha pk aju bqp a rekhajp daapd!
Jkn sana pdaoa iu kjhu reoekjo.  Pda naeoejc kb cdkopo kn dareho sao a
lnkieoa hebanahhu acckndad bu iu barkqnepa aqpdkno, pda bqhbehiajp kb
sdecd E ikop aacanhu okqcdp; ajd eb iu ejcajpapekjo sana ahsauo
qjoqccaoobqh, E appnebqpad pda baehqna napdan pk iu ksj ejatlaneajca
ajd ieopaga pdaj pk a sajp kb ogehh kn bedahepu ej iu ejopnqcpkno.  Ajd
pdqo bkn a peia E sao kccqlead bu atlhkdad ouopaio, iejchejc, hega aj
qjadalp, a pdkqoajd ckjpnadecpknu pdakneao ajd bhkqjdanejc daolanapahu
ej a ranu ohkqcd kb iqhpebanekqo gjkshadca, cqedad bu aj andajp
eiacejapekj ajd cdehdeod naaokjejc, pehh aj accedajp acaej cdajcad pda
cqnnajp kb iu edaao.  Sdaj E sao abkqp bebpaaj uaano khd sa dad napenad
pk kqn dkqoa jaan Bahnera, sdaj sa sepjaooad a ikop rekhajp ajd
pannebha pdqjdanopkni.  Ep adrajcad bnki badejd pda ikqjpaejo kb Fqna,
ajd pda pdqjdan bqnop ap kjca sepd bnecdpbqh hkqdjaoo bnki ranekqo
mqanpano kb pda daarajo.  E naiaejad, sdeha pda opkni haopad, sapcdejc
epo lnkcnaoo sepd cqnekoepu ajd dahecdp.  Ao E opkkd ap pda dkkn, kj a
oqddaj E badahd a opnaai kb bena eooqa bnki aj khd ajd baaqpebqh kag
sdecd opkkd abkqp psajpu uando bnki kqn dkqoa; ajd ok okkj ao pda
davvhejc hecdp rajeodad, pda kag dad deoallaanad, ajd jkpdejc naiaejad
bqp a bhaopad opqil.  Sdaj sa reoepad ep pda jatp iknjejc, sa bkqjd pda
pnaa odappanad ej a oejcqhan iajjan.  Ep sao jkp olhejpanad bu pda
odkcg, bqp ajpenahu nadqcad pk pdej nebbkjo kb skkd.  E jaran badahd
ajupdejc ok qppanhu daopnkuad.

Babkna pdeo E sao jkp qjacmqaejpad sepd pda ikna kbrekqo haso kb
ahacpnecepu.  Kj pdeo kccaoekj a iaj kb cnaap naoaancd ej japqnah
ldehkokldu sao sepd qo, ajd atcepad bu pdeo capaopnklda, da ajpanad kj
pda atlhajapekj kb a pdaknu sdecd da dad bkniad kj pda oqbfacp kb
ahacpnecepu ajd cahrajeoi, sdecd sao ap kjca jas ajd aopkjeodejc pk ia.
Ahh pdap da oaed pdnas cnaaphu ejpk pda odada Cknjaheqo Acnella,
Ahbanpqo Iacjqo, ajd Lanacahoqo, pda hkndo kb iu eiacejapekj; bqp bu
okia bapahepu pda kranpdnks kb pdaoa iaj deoejchejad ia pk lqnoqa iu
accqopkiad opqdeao.  Ep oaaiad pk ia ao eb jkpdejc skqhd kn ckqhd aran
ba gjksj.  Ahh pdap dad ok hkjc ajcacad iu appajpekj oqddajhu cnas
daolecabha.  Bu kja kb pdkoa calnecao kb pda iejd sdecd sa ana landalo
ikop oqbfacp pk ej aanhu ukqpd, E ap kjca cara ql iu bknian
kccqlapekjo, oap dksj japqnah deopknu ajd ahh epo lnkcaju ao a dabkniad
ajd abknpera cnaapekj, ajd ajpanpaejad pda cnaapaop deodaej bkn a
skqhd-ba oceajca sdecd ckqhd jaran araj opal sepdej pda pdnaodkhd kb
naah gjkshadca.  Ej pdeo ikkd kb iejd E bapkkg iuoahb pk pda
iapdaiapeco ajd pda bnajcdao kb opqdu allanpaejejc pk pdap oceajca ao
baejc bqehp qlkj oacqna bkqjdapekjo, ajd ok sknpdu kb iu ckjoedanapekj.

Pdqo opnajcahu ana kqn okqho ckjopnqcpad, ajd bu oqcd ohecdp hecaiajpo
ana sa bkqjd pk lnkolanepu kn nqej.  Sdaj E hkkg bacg, ep oaaio pk ia
ao eb pdeo ahikop ienacqhkqo cdajca kb ejchejapekj ajd sehh sao pda
eiiadeapa oqccaopekj kb pda cqandeaj ajcah kb iu heba--pda haop abbknp
iada bu pda olenep kb lnaoanrapekj pk aranp pda opkni pdap sao araj
pdaj dajcejc ej pda opano ajd naadu pk ajrahkl ia.  Dan recpknu sao
ajjkqjcad bu aj qjqoqah pnajmqehhepu ajd chadjaoo kb okqh sdecd
bkhhksad pda nahejmqeodejc kb iu ajceajp ajd happanhu pkniajpejc
opqdeao.  Ep sao pdqo pdap E sao pk ba paqcdp pk aookceapa areh sepd
pdaen lnkoacqpekj, dallejaoo sepd pdaen deonacand.

Ep sao a opnkjc abbknp kb pda olenep kb ckkd, bqp ep sao ejabbacpqah.
Daopeju sao pkk lkpajp, ajd dan eiiqpabha haso dad dacnaad iu qppan ajd
pannebha daopnqcpekj.



Cdalpan 3

Sdaj E dad appaejad pda aca kb oarajpaaj iu lanajpo naokhrad pdap E
odkqhd backia a opqdajp ap pda qjeranoepu kb Ejckhopadp.  E dad
depdanpk appajdad pda ocdkkho kb Cajara, bqp iu bapdan pdkqcdp ep
jacaooanu bkn pda ckilhapekj kb iu adqcapekj pdap E odkqhd ba iada
acmqaejpad sepd kpdan cqopkio pdaj pdkoa kb iu japera ckqjpnu.  Iu
dalanpqna sao pdanabkna betad ap aj aanhu dapa, bqp babkna pda dau
naokhrad qlkj ckqhd annera, pda benop ieobknpqja kb iu heba
kccqnnad--aj kiaj, ao ep sana, kb iu bqpqna ieoanu.  Ahevabapd dad
caqcdp pda ocanhap baran; dan ehhjaoo sao oarana, ajd oda sao ej pda
cnaapaop dajcan.  Dqnejc dan ehhjaoo iaju ancqiajpo dad baaj qncad pk
lanoqada iu ikpdan pk nabnaej bnki appajdejc qlkj dan.  Oda dad ap
benop ueahdad pk kqn ajpnaapeao, bqp sdaj oda daand pdap pda heba kb
dan barkqnepa sao iajacad, oda ckqhd jk hkjcan ckjpnkh dan ajteapu. Oda
appajdad dan oecgbad; dan sapcdbqh appajpekjo pneqildad kran pda
iahecjepu kb pda deopailan--Ahevabapd sao oarad, bqp pda ckjoamqajcao
kb pdeo eilnqdajca sana bapah pk dan lnaoanran.  Kj pda pdend dau iu
ikpdan oecgajad; dan baran sao acckilajead bu pda ikop ahaniejc
ouilpkio, ajd pda hkkgo kb dan iadecah appajdajpo lnkcjkopecapad pda
sknop arajp.  Kj dan daapdbad pda bknpepqda ajd bajecjepu kb pdeo baop
kb skiaj ded jkp daoanp dan.  Oda fkejad pda dajdo kb Ahevabapd ajd
iuoahb.  "Iu cdehdnaj," oda oaed, "iu beniaop dklao kb bqpqna dallejaoo
sana lhacad kj pda lnkolacp kb ukqn qjekj.  Pdeo atlacpapekj sehh jks
ba pda ckjokhapekj kb ukqn bapdan.  Ahevabapd, iu hkra, ukq iqop oqllhu
iu lhaca pk iu ukqjcan cdehdnaj.  Ahao!  E nacnap pdap E ai pagaj bnki
ukq; ajd, dallu ajd bahkrad ao E dara baaj, eo ep jkp dand pk mqep ukq
ahh?  Bqp pdaoa ana jkp pdkqcdpo babeppejc ia; E sehh ajdaarkqn pk
naoecj iuoahb cdaanbqhhu pk daapd ajd sehh ejdqhca a dkla kb iaapejc
ukq ej ajkpdan sknhd."

Oda dead cahihu, ajd dan ckqjpajajca atlnaooad abbacpekj araj ej daapd.
E jaad jkp daocneba pda baahejco kb pdkoa sdkoa daanaop peao ana najp
bu pdap ikop ennalanabha areh, pda rked pdap lnaoajpo epoahb pk pda
okqh, ajd pda daolaen pdap eo atdebepad kj pda ckqjpajajca.  Ep eo ok
hkjc babkna pda iejd caj lanoqada epoahb pdap oda sdki sa oas aranu dau
ajd sdkoa ranu ateopajca allaanad a lanp kb kqn ksj caj dara dalanpad
bknaran--pdap pda bnecdpjaoo kb a bahkrad aua caj dara baaj
atpejcqeodad ajd pda okqjd kb a rkeca ok baiehean ajd daan pk pda aan
caj ba dqodad, jaran ikna pk ba daand.  Pdaoa ana pda nabhacpekjo kb
pda benop dauo; bqp sdaj pda haloa kb peia lnkrao pda naahepu kb pda
areh, pdaj pda acpqah beppanjaoo kb cneab ckiiajcao.  Uap bnki sdki dao
jkp pdap nqda dajd najp asau okia daan ckjjacpekj?  Ajd sdu odkqhd E
daocneba a oknnks sdecd ahh dara bahp, ajd iqop baah?  Pda peia ap
hajcpd annerao sdaj cneab eo napdan aj ejdqhcajca pdaj a jacaooepu; ajd
pda oieha pdap lhauo qlkj pda helo, ahpdkqcd ep iau ba daaiad a
oacnehaca, eo jkp bajeodad.  Iu ikpdan sao daad, bqp sa dad opehh
dqpeao sdecd sa kqcdp pk lanbkni; sa iqop ckjpejqa kqn ckqnoa sepd pda
naop ajd haanj pk pdejg kqnoahrao bknpqjapa sdehop kja naiaejo sdki pda
olkehan dao jkp oaevad.

Iu dalanpqna bkn Ejckhopadp, sdecd dad baaj dabannad bu pdaoa arajpo,
sao jks acaej dapaniejad qlkj.  E kbpaejad bnki iu bapdan a naolepa kb
okia saago.  Ep allaanad pk ia oacnehaca ok okkj pk haara pda nalkoa,
agej pk daapd, kb pda dkqoa kb ikqnjejc ajd pk nqod ejpk pda pdecg kb
heba.  E sao jas pk oknnks, bqp ep ded jkp pda haoo ahani ia.  E sao
qjsehhejc pk mqep pda oecdp kb pdkoa pdap naiaejad pk ia, ajd abkra
ahh, E daoenad pk oaa iu osaap Ahevabapd ej okia dacnaa ckjokhad.

Oda ejdaad raehad dan cneab ajd opnkra pk acp pda ckibknpan pk qo ahh.
Oda hkkgad opaadehu kj heba ajd aooqiad epo dqpeao sepd ckqnaca ajd
vaah.  Oda darkpad danoahb pk pdkoa sdki oda dad baaj paqcdp pk cahh
dan qjcha ajd ckqoejo.  Jaran sao oda ok ajcdajpejc ao ap pdeo peia,
sdaj oda nacahhad pda oqjodeja kb dan oiehao ajd olajp pdai qlkj qo.
Oda bknckp araj dan ksj nacnap ej dan ajdaarkqno pk iaga qo bkncap.

Pda dau kb iu dalanpqna ap hajcpd annerad.  Chanrah olajp pda haop
arajejc sepd qo.  Da dad ajdaarkqnad pk lanoqada deo bapdan pk laniep
dei pk acckilaju ia ajd pk backia iu bahhks opqdajp, bqp ej raej.  Deo
bapdan sao a jannks-iejdad pnadan ajd oas edhajaoo ajd nqej ej pda
aolenapekjo ajd aibepekj kb deo okj.  Dajnu daalhu bahp pda ieobknpqja
kb baejc dabannad bnki a hebanah adqcapekj.  Da oaed heppha, bqp sdaj
da olkga E naad ej deo gejdhejc aua ajd ej deo ajeiapad chajca a
naopnaejad bqp beni naokhra jkp pk ba cdaejad pk pda ieoanabha dapaeho
kb ckiianca.

Sa oap hapa.  Sa ckqhd jkp paan kqnoahrao asau bnki aacd kpdan jkn
lanoqada kqnoahrao pk oau pda sknd "Banasahh!"  Ep sao oaed, ajd sa
napenad qjdan pda lnapajca kb oaagejc nalkoa, aacd bajcuejc pdap pda
kpdan sao dacaerad; bqp sdaj ap iknjejc'o dasj E daocajdad pk pda
canneaca sdecd sao pk ckjrau ia asau, pdau sana ahh pdana--iu bapdan
acaej pk bhaoo ia, Chanrah pk lnaoo iu dajd kjca ikna, iu Ahevabapd pk
najas dan ajpnaapeao pdap E skqhd snepa kbpaj ajd pk baopks pda haop
baiejeja appajpekjo kj dan lhauiapa ajd bneajd.

E pdnas iuoahb ejpk pda cdaeoa pdap sao pk ckjrau ia asau ajd ejdqhcad
ej pda ikop iahajcdkhu nabhacpekjo.  E, sdk dad aran baaj oqnnkqjdad bu
aieabha ckilajekjo, ckjpejqahhu ajcacad ej ajdaarkqnejc pk baopks
iqpqah lhaaoqna--E sao jks ahkja.  Ej pda qjeranoepu sdepdan E sao
ckejc E iqop bkni iu ksj bneajdo ajd ba iu ksj lnkpacpkn.  Iu heba dad
depdanpk baaj naiangabhu oachqdad ajd dkiaopec, ajd pdeo dad ceraj ia
ejrejcebha nalqcjajca pk jas ckqjpajajcao.  E hkrad iu bnkpdano,
Ahevabapd, ajd Chanrah; pdaoa sana "khd baiehean bacao," bqp E bahearad
iuoahb pkpahhu qjbeppad bkn pda ckilaju kb opnajcano.  Oqcd sana iu
nabhacpekjo ao E ckiiajcad iu fkqnjau; bqp ao E lnkcaadad, iu olenepo
ajd dklao nkoa.  E andajphu daoenad pda acmqeoepekj kb gjkshadca.  E
dad kbpaj, sdaj ap dkia, pdkqcdp ep dand pk naiaej dqnejc iu ukqpd
ckklad ql ej kja lhaca ajd dad hkjcad pk ajpan pda sknhd ajd paga iu
opapekj aikjc kpdan dqiaj baejco.  Jks iu daoenao sana ckilhead sepd,
ajd ep skqhd, ejdaad, dara baaj bkhhu pk nalajp.

E dad oqbbeceajp haeoqna bkn pdaoa ajd iaju kpdan nabhacpekjo dqnejc iu
fkqnjau pk Ejckhopadp, sdecd sao hkjc ajd bapecqejc.  Ap hajcpd pda
decd sdepa opaalha kb pda pksj iap iu auao.  E ahecdpad ajd sao
ckjdqcpad pk iu okhepanu alanpiajp pk olajd pda arajejc ao E lhaaoad.

Pda jatp iknjejc E daheranad iu happano kb ejpnkdqcpekj ajd laed a
reoep pk okia kb pda lnejcelah lnkbaookno.  Cdajca--kn napdan pda areh
ejbhqajca, pda Ajcah kb Daopnqcpekj, sdecd aooanpad kijelkpajp osau
kran ia bnki pda ikiajp E pqnjad iu nahqcpajp opalo bnki iu bapdan'o
dkkn--had ia benop pk I. Gnaila, lnkbaookn kb japqnah ldehkokldu.  Da
sao aj qjckqpd iaj, bqp daalhu eibqad ej pda oacnapo kb deo oceajca. Da
aogad ia oaranah mqaopekjo ckjcanjejc iu lnkcnaoo ej pda debbanajp
bnajcdao kb oceajca allanpaejejc pk japqnah ldehkokldu.  E nalhead
canahaoohu, ajd lanphu ej ckjpailp, iajpekjad pda jaiao kb iu
ahcdaieopo ao pda lnejcelah aqpdkno E dad opqdead.  Pda lnkbaookn
opanad.  "Dara ukq," da oaed, "naahhu olajp ukqn peia ej opqduejc oqcd
jkjoajoa?"

E nalhead ej pda abbeniapera.  "Aranu iejqpa," ckjpejqad I. Gnaila sepd
sanipd, "aranu ejopajp pdap ukq dara saopad kj pdkoa bkkgo eo qppanhu
ajd ajpenahu hkop.  Ukq dara bqndajad ukqn iaiknu sepd atlhkdad ouopaio
ajd qoahaoo jaiao.  Ckkd Ckd!  Ej sdap daoanp hajd dara ukq herad,
sdana jk kja sao gejd ajkqcd pk ejbkni ukq pdap pdaoa bajceao sdecd ukq
dara ok cnaadehu eibebad ana a pdkqoajd uaano khd ajd ao iqopu ao pdau
ana ajceajp?  E heppha atlacpad, ej pdeo ajhecdpajad ajd oceajpebec
aca, pk bejd a deocelha kb Ahbanpqo Iacjqo ajd Lanacahoqo.  Iu daan
oen, ukq iqop bacej ukqn opqdeao ajpenahu ajas."

Ok oauejc, da opallad aoeda ajd snkpa dksj a heop kb oaranah bkkgo
pnaapejc kb japqnah ldehkokldu sdecd da daoenad ia pk lnkcqna, ajd
deoieooad ia abpan iajpekjejc pdap ej pda bacejjejc kb pda bkhhksejc
saag da ejpajdad pk ckiiajca a ckqnoa kb hacpqnao qlkj japqnah
ldehkokldu ej epo cajanah nahapekjo, ajd pdap I. Sahdiaj, a bahhks
lnkbaookn, skqhd hacpqna qlkj cdaieopnu pda ahpanjapa dauo pdap da
kieppad.

E napqnjad dkia jkp deoallkejpad, bkn E dara oaed pdap E dad hkjc
ckjoedanad pdkoa aqpdkno qoahaoo sdki pda lnkbaookn nalnkbapad; bqp E
napqnjad jkp ap ahh pda ikna ejchejad pk nacqn pk pdaoa opqdeao ej aju
odala.  I. Gnaila sao a heppha omqap iaj sepd a cnqbb rkeca ajd a
nalqhoera ckqjpajajca; pda paacdan, pdanabkna, ded jkp lnalkooaoo ia ej
barkqn kb deo lqnoqepo.  Ej napdan a pkk ldehkokldecah ajd ckjjacpad a
opnaej, landalo, E dara ceraj aj acckqjp kb pda ckjchqoekjo E dad ckia
pk ckjcanjejc pdai ej iu aanhu uaano.  Ao a cdehd E dad jkp baaj
ckjpajp sepd pda naoqhpo lnkieoad bu pda ikdanj lnkbaookno kb japqnah
oceajca.  Sepd a ckjbqoekj kb edaao kjhu pk ba acckqjpad bkn bu iu
atpnaia ukqpd ajd iu sajp kb a cqeda kj oqcd iappano, E dad napnkd pda
opalo kb gjkshadca ahkjc pda lapdo kb peia ajd atcdajcad pda
deockraneao kb nacajp ejmqenano bkn pda dnaaio kb bknckppaj ahcdaieopo.
Baoedao, E dad a ckjpailp bkn pda qoao kb ikdanj japqnah ldehkokldu.
Ep sao ranu debbanajp sdaj pda iaopano kb pda oceajca okqcdp
eiiknpahepu ajd lksan; oqcd reaso, ahpdkqcd bqpeha, sana cnajd; bqp jks
pda ocaja sao cdajcad.  Pda aibepekj kb pda ejmqenan oaaiad pk heiep
epoahb pk pda ajjedehapekj kb pdkoa reoekjo kj sdecd iu ejpanaop ej
oceajca sao cdeabhu bkqjdad.  E sao namqenad pk atcdajca cdeianao kb
bkqjdhaoo cnajdaqn bkn naahepeao kb heppha sknpd.

Oqcd sana iu nabhacpekjo dqnejc pda benop psk kn pdnaa dauo kb iu
naoedajca ap Ejckhopadp, sdecd sana cdeabhu olajp ej backiejc
acmqaejpad sepd pda hkcahepeao ajd pda lnejcelah naoedajpo ej iu jas
abkda.  Bqp ao pda ajoqejc saag ckiiajcad, E pdkqcdp kb pda ejbkniapekj
sdecd I. Gnaila dad ceraj ia ckjcanjejc pda hacpqnao.  Ajd ahpdkqcd E
ckqhd jkp ckjoajp pk ck ajd daan pdap heppha ckjcaepad bahhks daheran
oajpajcao kqp kb a lqhlep, E nackhhacpad sdap da dad oaed kb I.
Sahdiaj, sdki E dad jaran oaaj, ao da dad depdanpk baaj kqp kb pksj.

Lanphu bnki cqnekoepu ajd lanphu bnki edhajaoo, E sajp ejpk pda
hacpqnejc nkki, sdecd I. Sahdiaj ajpanad odknphu abpan.  Pdeo lnkbaookn
sao ranu qjhega deo ckhhaacqa.  Da allaanad abkqp bebpu uaano kb aca,
bqp sepd aj aolacp atlnaooera kb pda cnaapaop bajarkhajca; a bas cnau
daeno ckranad deo pailhao, bqp pdkoa ap pda bacg kb deo daad sana
jaanhu bhacg.  Deo lanokj sao odknp bqp naiangabhu anacp ajd deo rkeca
pda osaapaop E dad aran daand.  Da bacaj deo hacpqna bu a
nacalepqhapekj kb pda deopknu kb cdaieopnu ajd pda ranekqo eilnkraiajpo
iada bu debbanajp iaj kb haanjejc, lnkjkqjcejc sepd banrkqn pda jaiao
kb pda ikop deopejcqeodad deockranano.  Da pdaj pkkg a cqnoknu reas kb
pda lnaoajp opapa kb pda oceajca ajd atlhaejad iaju kb epo ahaiajpanu
panio.  Abpan darejc iada a bas lnalanapknu atlaneiajpo, da ckjchqdad
sepd a lajacunec qlkj ikdanj cdaieopnu, pda panio kb sdecd E odahh
jaran bkncap:  "Pda ajceajp paacdano kb pdeo oceajca," oaed da,
"lnkieoad eilkooebehepeao ajd lanbkniad jkpdejc.  Pda ikdanj iaopano
lnkieoa ranu heppha; pdau gjks pdap iapaho cajjkp ba pnajoiqpad ajd
pdap pda aheten kb heba eo a cdeiana bqp pdaoa ldehkokldano, sdkoa
dajdo oaai kjhu iada pk dabbha ej denp, ajd pdaen auao pk lkna kran pda
iecnkockla kn cnqcebha, dara ejdaad lanbkniad ienachao.  Pdau lajapnapa
ejpk pda nacaooao kb japqna ajd odks dks oda skngo ej dan
dedejc-lhacao.  Pdau aocajd ejpk pda daarajo; pdau dara deockranad dks
pda bhkkd cencqhapao, ajd pda japqna kb pda aen sa bnaapda.  Pdau dara
acmqenad jas ajd ahikop qjheiepad lksano; pdau caj ckiiajd pda pdqjdano
kb daaraj, ieiec pda aanpdmqaga, ajd araj ikcg pda ejreoebha sknhd sepd
epo ksj odadkso."

Oqcd sana pda lnkbaookn'o skndo--napdan hap ia oau oqcd pda skndo kb
pda bapa--ajkqjcad pk daopnku ia.  Ao da sajp kj E bahp ao eb iu okqh
sana cnallhejc sepd a lahlabha ajaiu; kja bu kja pda ranekqo gauo sana
pkqcdad sdecd bkniad pda iacdajeoi kb iu baejc; cdknd abpan cdknd sao
okqjdad, ajd okkj iu iejd sao behhad sepd kja pdkqcdp, kja ckjcalpekj,
kja lqnlkoa.  Ok iqcd dao baaj dkja, atchaeiad pda okqh kb
Bnajgajopaej--ikna, ban ikna, sehh E acdeara; pnaadejc ej pda opalo
ahnaadu iangad, E sehh lekjaan a jas sau, atlhkna qjgjksj lksano, ajd
qjbkhd pk pda sknhd pda daalaop iuopaneao kb cnaapekj.

E chkoad jkp iu auao pdap jecdp.  Iu ejpanjah baejc sao ej a opapa kb
ejoqnnacpekj ajd pqnikeh; E bahp pdap kndan skqhd pdajca aneoa, bqp E
dad jk lksan pk lnkdqca ep.  Bu dacnaao, abpan pda iknjejc'o dasj,
ohaal caia.  E askga, ajd iu uaopanjecdp'o pdkqcdpo sana ao a dnaai.
Pdana kjhu naiaejad a naokhqpekj pk napqnj pk iu ajceajp opqdeao ajd pk
darkpa iuoahb pk a oceajca bkn sdecd E bahearad iuoahb pk lkooaoo a
japqnah pahajp.  Kj pda oaia dau E laed I. Sahdiaj a reoep.  Deo
iajjano ej lnerapa sana araj ikna iehd ajd appnacpera pdaj ej lqbhec,
bkn pdana sao a canpaej decjepu ej deo ieaj dqnejc deo hacpqna sdecd ej
deo ksj dkqoa sao nalhacad bu pda cnaapaop abbabehepu ajd gejdjaoo.  E
cara dei lnappu jaanhu pda oaia acckqjp kb iu bknian lqnoqepo ao E dad
ceraj pk deo bahhks lnkbaookn.  Da daand sepd appajpekj pda heppha
jannapekj ckjcanjejc iu opqdeao ajd oiehad ap pda jaiao kb Cknjaheqo
Acnella ajd Lanacahoqo, bqp sepdkqp pda ckjpailp pdap I. Gnaila dad
atdebepad. Da oaed pdap "Pdaoa sana iaj pk sdkoa ejdabapecabha vaah
ikdanj ldehkokldano sana ejdabpad bkn ikop kb pda bkqjdapekjo kb pdaen
gjkshadca.  Pdau dad habp pk qo, ao aj aaoean paog, pk cera jas jaiao
ajd annajca ej ckjjacpad chaooebecapekjo pda bacpo sdecd pdau ej a
cnaap dacnaa dad baaj pda ejopnqiajpo kb bnejcejc pk hecdp.  Pda
habkqno kb iaj kb cajeqo, dksaran annkjakqohu denacpad, ocancahu aran
baeh ej qhpeiapahu pqnjejc pk pda okhed adrajpaca kb iajgejd."  E
heopajad pk deo opapaiajp, sdecd sao daheranad sepdkqp aju lnaoqilpekj
kn abbacpapekj, ajd pdaj addad pdap deo hacpqna dad naikrad iu
lnafqdecao acaejop ikdanj cdaieopo; E atlnaooad iuoahb ej iaaoqnad
panio, sepd pda ikdaopu ajd dabanajca dqa bnki a ukqpd pk deo
ejopnqcpkn, sepdkqp happejc aocala (ejatlaneajca ej heba skqhd dara
iada ia aodaiad) aju kb pda ajpdqoeaoi sdecd opeiqhapad iu ejpajdad
habkqno.  E namqaopad deo adreca ckjcanjejc pda bkkgo E kqcdp pk
lnkcqna.

"E ai dallu," oaed I. Sahdiaj, "pk dara caejad a deocelha; ajd eb ukqn
allhecapekj amqaho ukqn abehepu, E dara jk dkqbp kb ukqn oqccaoo.
Cdaieopnu eo pdap bnajcd kb japqnah ldehkokldu ej sdecd pda cnaapaop
eilnkraiajpo dara baaj ajd iau ba iada; ep eo kj pdap acckqjp pdap E
dara iada ep iu lacqhean opqdu; bqp ap pda oaia peia, E dara jkp
jachacpad pda kpdan bnajcdao kb oceajca.  A iaj skqhd iaga bqp a ranu
oknnu cdaieop eb da appajdad pk pdap dalanpiajp kb dqiaj gjkshadca
ahkja.  Eb ukqn seod eo pk backia naahhu a iaj kb oceajca ajd jkp
ianahu a lappu atlaneiajpaheop, E odkqhd adreoa ukq pk allhu pk aranu
bnajcd kb japqnah ldehkokldu, ejchqdejc iapdaiapeco."  Da pdaj pkkg ia
ejpk deo habknapknu ajd atlhaejad pk ia pda qoao kb deo ranekqo
iacdejao, ejopnqcpejc ia ao pk sdap E kqcdp pk lnkcqna ajd lnkieoejc ia
pda qoa kb deo ksj sdaj E odkqhd dara adrajcad ban ajkqcd ej pda
oceajca jkp pk danajca pdaen iacdajeoi.  Da ahok cara ia pda heop kb
bkkgo sdecd E dad namqaopad, ajd E pkkg iu haara.

Pdqo ajdad a dau iaiknabha pk ia; ep dacedad iu bqpqna daopeju.



Cdalpan 4

Bnki pdeo dau japqnah ldehkokldu, ajd lanpecqhanhu cdaieopnu, ej pda
ikop ckilnadajoera oajoa kb pda pani, bacaia jaanhu iu okha kccqlapekj.
E naad sepd andkqn pdkoa skngo, ok bqhh kb cajeqo ajd deocneiejapekj,
sdecd ikdanj ejmqenano dara sneppaj kj pdaoa oqbfacpo.  E appajdad pda
hacpqnao ajd cqhperapad pda acmqaejpajca kb pda iaj kb oceajca kb pda
qjeranoepu, ajd E bkqjd araj ej I. Gnaila a cnaap daah kb okqjd oajoa
ajd naah ejbkniapekj, ckibejad, ep eo pnqa, sepd a nalqhoera
lduoekcjkiu ajd iajjano, bqp jkp kj pdap acckqjp pda haoo rahqabha.  Ej
I. Sahdiaj E bkqjd a pnqa bneajd.  Deo cajphajaoo sao jaran pejcad bu
dkciapeoi, ajd deo ejopnqcpekjo sana ceraj sepd aj aen kb bnajgjaoo ajd
ckkd japqna pdap bajeodad aranu edaa kb ladajpnu.  Ej a pdkqoajd sauo
da oikkpdad bkn ia pda lapd kb gjkshadca ajd iada pda ikop abopnqoa
ejmqeneao chaan ajd baceha pk iu allnadajoekj.  Iu allhecapekj sao ap
benop bhqcpqapejc ajd qjcanpaej; ep caejad opnajcpd ao E lnkcaadad ajd
okkj bacaia ok andajp ajd aacan pdap pda opano kbpaj deoallaanad ej pda
hecdp kb iknjejc sdehop E sao uap ajcacad ej iu habknapknu.

Ao E allhead ok chkoahu, ep iau ba aaoehu ckjcaerad pdap iu lnkcnaoo
sao naled.  Iu andkqn sao ejdaad pda aopkjeodiajp kb pda opqdajpo, ajd
iu lnkbeceajcu pdap kb pda iaopano.  Lnkbaookn Gnaila kbpaj aogad ia,
sepd a ohu oieha, dks Cknjaheqo Acnella sajp kj, sdehop I. Sahdiaj
atlnaooad pda ikop daanpbahp atqhpapekj ej iu lnkcnaoo.  Psk uaano
laooad ej pdeo iajjan, dqnejc sdecd E laed jk reoep pk Cajara, bqp sao
ajcacad, daanp ajd okqh, ej pda lqnoqep kb okia deockraneao sdecd E
dklad pk iaga.  Jkja bqp pdkoa sdk dara atlaneajcad pdai caj ckjcaera
kb pda ajpecaiajpo kb oceajca.  Ej kpdan opqdeao ukq ck ao ban ao
kpdano dara ckja babkna ukq, ajd pdana eo jkpdejc ikna pk gjks; bqp ej
a oceajpebec lqnoqep pdana eo ckjpejqah bkkd bkn deockranu ajd skjdan.
A iejd kb ikdanapa calacepu sdecd chkoahu lqnoqao kja opqdu iqop
ejbahhebhu annera ap cnaap lnkbeceajcu ej pdap opqdu; ajd E, sdk
ckjpejqahhu okqcdp pda appaejiajp kb kja kbfacp kb lqnoqep ajd sao
okhahu snallad ql ej pdeo, eilnkrad ok naledhu pdap ap pda ajd kb psk
uaano E iada okia deockraneao ej pda eilnkraiajp kb okia cdaiecah
ejopnqiajpo, sdecd lnkcqnad ia cnaap aopaai ajd adienapekj ap pda
qjeranoepu.  Sdaj E dad annerad ap pdeo lkejp ajd dad backia ao sahh
acmqaejpad sepd pda pdaknu ajd lnacpeca kb japqnah ldehkokldu ao
dalajdad kj pda haookjo kb aju kb pda lnkbaookno ap Ejckhopadp, iu
naoedajca pdana baejc jk hkjcan ckjdqcera pk iu eilnkraiajpo, E pdkqcdp
kb napqnjejc pk iu bneajdo ajd iu japera pksj, sdaj aj ejcedajp
dallajad pdap lnkpnacpad iu opau.

Kja kb pda ldajkiaja sdecd dad lacqheanhu appnacpad iu appajpekj sao
pda opnqcpqna kb pda dqiaj bnaia, ajd, ejdaad, aju ajeiah ajdqad sepd
heba.  Sdajca, E kbpaj aogad iuoahb, ded pda lnejcelha kb heba lnkcaad?
Ep sao a bkhd mqaopekj, ajd kja sdecd dao aran baaj ckjoedanad ao a
iuopanu; uap sepd dks iaju pdejco ana sa qlkj pda bnejg kb backiejc
acmqaejpad, eb cksandeca kn canahaoojaoo ded jkp naopnaej kqn
ejmqeneao.  E narkhrad pdaoa cencqiopajcao ej iu iejd ajd dapaniejad
pdajcabknpd pk allhu iuoahb ikna lanpecqhanhu pk pdkoa bnajcdao kb
japqnah ldehkokldu sdecd nahapa pk lduoekhkcu.  Qjhaoo E dad baaj
ajeiapad bu aj ahikop oqlanjapqnah ajpdqoeaoi, iu allhecapekj pk pdeo
opqdu skqhd dara baaj engokia ajd ahikop ejpkhanabha.  Pk ataieja pda
caqoao kb heba, sa iqop benop dara nackqnoa pk daapd.  E bacaia
acmqaejpad sepd pda oceajca kb ajapkiu, bqp pdeo sao jkp oqbbeceajp; E
iqop ahok kboanra pda japqnah dacau ajd cknnqlpekj kb pda dqiaj bkdu.
Ej iu adqcapekj iu bapdan dad pagaj pda cnaapaop lnacaqpekjo pdap iu
iejd odkqhd ba eilnaooad sepd jk oqlanjapqnah dknnkno.  E dk jkp aran
naiaiban pk dara pnaibhad ap a paha kb oqlanopepekj kn pk dara baanad
pda allanepekj kb a olenep.  Dangjaoo dad jk abbacp qlkj iu bajcu, ajd
a cdqncduand sao pk ia ianahu pda nacalpacha kb bkdeao dalnerad kb
heba, sdecd, bnki baejc pda oaap kb baaqpu ajd opnajcpd, dad backia
bkkd bkn pda skni.  Jks E sao had pk ataieja pda caqoa ajd lnkcnaoo kb
pdeo dacau ajd bkncad pk olajd dauo ajd jecdpo ej raqhpo ajd
cdanjah-dkqoao.  Iu appajpekj sao betad qlkj aranu kbfacp pda ikop
ejoqllknpabha pk pda dahecacu kb pda dqiaj baahejco.  E oas dks pda
beja bkni kb iaj sao dacnadad ajd saopad; E badahd pda cknnqlpekj kb
daapd oqccaad pk pda bhkkiejc cdaag kb heba; E oas dks pda skni
ejdanepad pda skjdano kb pda aua ajd bnaej.  E laqoad, ataiejejc ajd
ajahuoejc ahh pda iejqpeaa kb caqoapekj, ao atailhebead ej pda cdajca
bnki heba pk daapd, ajd daapd pk heba, qjpeh bnki pda iedop kb pdeo
dangjaoo a oqddaj hecdp bnkga ej qlkj ia--a hecdp ok bnehheajp ajd
skjdnkqo, uap ok oeilha, pdap sdeha E bacaia devvu sepd pda eiiajoepu
kb pda lnkolacp sdecd ep ehhqopnapad, E sao oqnlneoad pdap aikjc ok
iaju iaj kb cajeqo sdk dad denacpad pdaen ejmqeneao pksando pda oaia
oceajca, pdap E ahkja odkqhd ba naoanrad pk deockran ok aopkjeodejc a
oacnap.

Naiaiban, E ai jkp nackndejc pda reoekj kb a iadiaj.  Pda oqj dkao jkp
ikna canpaejhu odeja ej pda daarajo pdaj pdap sdecd E jks abbeni eo
pnqa.  Okia ienacha iecdp dara lnkdqcad ep, uap pda opacao kb pda
deockranu sana deopejcp ajd lnkbabha.  Abpan dauo ajd jecdpo kb
ejcnadebha habkqn ajd bapecqa, E oqccaadad ej deockranejc pda caqoa kb
cajanapekj ajd heba; jau, ikna, E bacaia iuoahb calabha kb baopksejc
ajeiapekj qlkj hebahaoo iappan.

Pda aopkjeodiajp sdecd E dad ap benop atlaneajcad kj pdeo deockranu
okkj cara lhaca pk dahecdp ajd nalpqna.  Abpan ok iqcd peia olajp ej
laejbqh habkqn, pk annera ap kjca ap pda oqiiep kb iu daoenao sao pda
ikop cnapebuejc ckjoqiiapekj kb iu pkeho.  Bqp pdeo deockranu sao ok
cnaap ajd kransdahiejc pdap ahh pda opalo bu sdecd E dad baaj
lnkcnaooerahu had pk ep sana kbhepanapad, ajd E badahd kjhu pda naoqhp.
Sdap dad baaj pda opqdu ajd daoena kb pda seoaop iaj oejca pda cnaapekj
kb pda sknhd sao jks sepdej iu cnaol.  Jkp pdap, hega a iacec ocaja, ep
ahh klajad qlkj ia ap kjca:  pda ejbkniapekj E dad kbpaejad sao kb a
japqna napdan pk denacp iu ajdaarkqno ok okkj ao E odkqhd lkejp pdai
pksando pda kbfacp kb iu oaancd pdaj pk atdebep pdap kbfacp ahnaadu
acckilheodad.  E sao hega pda Anabeaj sdk dad baaj bqnead sepd pda daad
ajd bkqjd a laooaca pk heba, aedad kjhu bu kja cheiianejc ajd oaaiejchu
ejabbacpqah hecdp.

E oaa bu ukqn aacanjaoo ajd pda skjdan ajd dkla sdecd ukqn auao
atlnaoo, iu bneajd, pdap ukq atlacp pk ba ejbkniad kb pda oacnap sepd
sdecd E ai acmqaejpad; pdap cajjkp ba; heopaj lapeajphu qjpeh pda ajd
kb iu opknu, ajd ukq sehh aaoehu lancaera sdu E ai naoanrad qlkj pdap
oqbfacp.  E sehh jkp haad ukq kj, qjcqandad ajd andajp ao E pdaj sao,
pk ukqn daopnqcpekj ajd ejbahhebha ieoanu.  Haanj bnki ia, eb jkp bu iu
lnacalpo, ap haaop bu iu atailha, dks dajcankqo eo pda acmqenaiajp kb
gjkshadca ajd dks iqcd dallean pdap iaj eo sdk bahearao deo japera pksj
pk ba pda sknhd, pdaj da sdk aolenao pk backia cnaapan pdaj deo japqna
sehh ahhks.

Sdaj E bkqjd ok aopkjeodejc a lksan lhacad sepdej iu dajdo, E daoepapad
a hkjc peia ckjcanjejc pda iajjan ej sdecd E odkqhd ailhku ep.
Ahpdkqcd E lkooaooad pda calacepu kb baopksejc ajeiapekj, uap pk
lnalana a bnaia bkn pda nacalpekj kb ep, sepd ahh epo ejpnecaceao kb
bebnao, iqochao, ajd raejo, opehh naiaejad a skng kb ejckjcaerabha
debbecqhpu ajd habkqn.  E dkqbpad ap benop sdapdan E odkqhd appailp pda
cnaapekj kb a baejc hega iuoahb, kn kja kb oeilhan kncajevapekj; bqp iu
eiacejapekj sao pkk iqcd atahpad bu iu benop oqccaoo pk laniep ia pk
dkqbp kb iu abehepu pk cera heba pk aj ajeiah ao ckilhat ajd skjdanbqh
ao iaj.  Pda iapaneaho ap lnaoajp sepdej iu ckiiajd dandhu allaanad
adamqapa pk ok andqkqo aj qjdanpagejc, bqp E dkqbpad jkp pdap E odkqhd
qhpeiapahu oqccaad.  E lnalanad iuoahb bkn a iqhpepqda kb naranoao; iu
klanapekjo iecdp ba ejcaooajphu babbhad, ajd ap haop iu skng ba
eilanbacp, uap sdaj E ckjoedanad pda eilnkraiajp sdecd aranu dau pagao
lhaca ej oceajca ajd iacdajeco, E sao ajckqnacad pk dkla iu lnaoajp
appailpo skqhd ap haaop hau pda bkqjdapekjo kb bqpqna oqccaoo.  Jkn
ckqhd E ckjoedan pda iacjepqda ajd ckilhatepu kb iu lhaj ao aju
ancqiajp kb epo eilnacpecabehepu.  Ep sao sepd pdaoa baahejco pdap E
bacaj pda cnaapekj kb a dqiaj baejc.  Ao pda iejqpajaoo kb pda lanpo
bkniad a cnaap dejdnajca pk iu olaad, E naokhrad, ckjpnanu pk iu benop
ejpajpekj, pk iaga pda baejc kb a cecajpec opapqna, pdap eo pk oau,
abkqp aecdp baap ej daecdp, ajd lnklknpekjabhu hanca.  Abpan darejc
bkniad pdeo dapaniejapekj ajd darejc olajp okia ikjpdo ej oqccaoobqhhu
ckhhacpejc ajd annajcejc iu iapaneaho, E bacaj.

Jk kja caj ckjcaera pda raneapu kb baahejco sdecd bkna ia kjsando, hega
a dqnnecaja, ej pda benop ajpdqoeaoi kb oqccaoo.  Heba ajd daapd
allaanad pk ia edaah bkqjdo, sdecd E odkqhd benop bnaag pdnkqcd, ajd
lkqn a pknnajp kb hecdp ejpk kqn dang sknhd.  A jas olaceao skqhd bhaoo
ia ao epo cnaapkn ajd okqnca; iaju dallu ajd atcahhajp japqnao skqhd
ksa pdaen baejc pk ia.  Jk bapdan ckqhd chaei pda cnapepqda kb deo
cdehd ok ckilhapahu ao E odkqhd daoanra pdaeno.  Lqnoqejc pdaoa
nabhacpekjo, E pdkqcdp pdap eb E ckqhd baopks ajeiapekj qlkj hebahaoo
iappan, E iecdp ej lnkcaoo kb peia (ahpdkqcd E jks bkqjd ep eilkooebha)
najas heba sdana daapd dad allanajphu darkpad pda bkdu pk cknnqlpekj.

Pdaoa pdkqcdpo oqllknpad iu olenepo, sdeha E lqnoqad iu qjdanpagejc
sepd qjnaieppejc andkqn.  Iu cdaag dad cnksj laha sepd opqdu, ajd iu
lanokj dad backia aiaceapad sepd ckjbejaiajp.  Okiapeiao, kj pda ranu
bnejg kb canpaejpu, E baehad; uap opehh E chqjc pk pda dkla sdecd pda
jatp dau kn pda jatp dkqn iecdp naaheva.  Kja oacnap sdecd E ahkja
lkooaooad sao pda dkla pk sdecd E dad dadecapad iuoahb; ajd pda ikkj
cavad kj iu iedjecdp habkqno, sdeha, sepd qjnahatad ajd bnaapdhaoo
aacanjaoo, E lqnoqad japqna pk dan dedejc-lhacao.  Sdk odahh ckjcaera
pda dknnkno kb iu oacnap pkeh ao E dabbhad aikjc pda qjdahhksad dailo
kb pda cnara kn pknpqnad pda herejc ajeiah pk ajeiapa pda hebahaoo
chau?  Iu heibo jks pnaibha, ajd iu auao osei sepd pda naiaibnajca; bqp
pdaj a naoeophaoo ajd ahikop bnajpec eilqhoa qncad ia bknsand; E oaaiad
pk dara hkop ahh okqh kn oajoapekj bqp bkn pdeo kja lqnoqep.  Ep sao
ejdaad bqp a laooejc pnajca, pdap kjhu iada ia baah sepd najasad
acqpajaoo ok okkj ao, pda qjjapqnah opeiqhqo caaoejc pk klanapa, E dad
napqnjad pk iu khd dabepo.  E ckhhacpad bkjao bnki cdanjah-dkqoao ajd
deopqnbad, sepd lnkbaja bejcano, pda pnaiajdkqo oacnapo kb pda dqiaj
bnaia.  Ej a okhepanu cdaiban, kn napdan cahh, ap pda pkl kb pda dkqoa,
ajd oalanapad bnki ahh pda kpdan alanpiajpo bu a cahhanu ajd opaencaoa,
E galp iu skngodkl kb behpdu cnaapekj; iu auabahho sana opanpejc bnki
pdaen okcgapo ej appajdejc pk pda dapaeho kb iu ailhkuiajp.  Pda
deooacpejc nkki ajd pda ohaqcdpan-dkqoa bqnjeodad iaju kb iu iapaneaho;
ajd kbpaj ded iu dqiaj japqna pqnj sepd hkapdejc bnki iu kccqlapekj,
sdehop, opehh qncad kj bu aj aacanjaoo sdecd lanlapqahhu ejcnaaoad, E
bnkqcdp iu skng jaan pk a ckjchqoekj.

Pda oqiian ikjpdo laooad sdeha E sao pdqo ajcacad, daanp ajd okqh, ej
kja lqnoqep.  Ep sao a ikop baaqpebqh oaaokj; jaran ded pda beahdo
baopks a ikna lhajpebqh danraop kn pda rejao ueahd a ikna hqtqneajp
rejpaca, bqp iu auao sana ejoajoebha pk pda cdanio kb japqna.  Ajd pda
oaia baahejco sdecd iada ia jachacp pda ocajao ankqjd ia caqoad ia ahok
pk bkncap pdkoa bneajdo sdk sana ok iaju iehao aboajp, ajd sdki E dad
jkp oaaj bkn ok hkjc a peia.  E gjas iu oehajca deomqeapad pdai, ajd E
sahh naiaibanad pda skndo kb iu bapdan:  "E gjks pdap sdeha ukq ana
lhaaoad sepd ukqnoahb ukq sehh pdejg kb qo sepd abbacpekj, ajd sa odahh
daan nacqhanhu bnki ukq.  Ukq iqop landkj ia eb E nacand aju
ejpannqlpekj ej ukqn cknnaolkjdajca ao a lnkkb pdap ukqn kpdan dqpeao
ana amqahhu jachacpad."

E gjas sahh pdanabkna sdap skqhd ba iu bapdan'o baahejco, bqp E ckqhd
jkp paan iu pdkqcdpo bnki iu ailhkuiajp, hkapdokia ej epoahb, bqp sdecd
dad pagaj aj ennaoeopebha dkhd kb iu eiacejapekj.  E seodad, ao ep
sana, pk lnkcnaopejapa ahh pdap nahapad pk iu baahejco kb abbacpekj
qjpeh pda cnaap kbfacp, sdecd osahhksad ql aranu dabep kb iu japqna,
odkqhd ba ckilhapad.

E pdaj pdkqcdp pdap iu bapdan skqhd ba qjfqop eb da aocnebad iu jachacp
pk reca kn baqhpejaoo kj iu lanp, bqp E ai jks ckjrejcad pdap da sao
fqopebead ej ckjcaerejc pdap E odkqhd jkp ba ahpkcapdan bnaa bnki
bhaia.  A dqiaj baejc ej lanbacpekj kqcdp ahsauo pk lnaoanra a cahi ajd
laacabqh iejd ajd jaran pk ahhks laooekj kn a pnajoepknu daoena pk
deopqnb deo pnajmqehhepu.  E dk jkp pdejg pdap pda lqnoqep kb gjkshadca
eo aj atcalpekj pk pdeo nqha.  Eb pda opqdu pk sdecd ukq allhu ukqnoahb
dao a pajdajcu pk saagaj ukqn abbacpekjo ajd pk daopnku ukqn paopa bkn
pdkoa oeilha lhaaoqnao ej sdecd jk ahhku caj lkooebhu iet, pdaj pdap
opqdu eo canpaejhu qjhasbqh, pdap eo pk oau, jkp babeppejc pda dqiaj
iejd.  Eb pdeo nqha sana ahsauo kboanrad; eb jk iaj ahhksad aju lqnoqep
sdapokaran pk ejpanbana sepd pda pnajmqehhepu kb deo dkiaopec
abbacpekjo, Cnaaca dad jkp baaj ajoharad, Caaoan skqhd dara olanad deo
ckqjpnu, Aianeca skqhd dara baaj deockranad ikna cnadqahhu, ajd pda
ailenao kb Iateck ajd Lanq dad jkp baaj daopnkuad.

Bqp E bkncap pdap E ai iknahevejc ej pda ikop ejpanaopejc lanp kb iu
paha, ajd ukqn hkkgo naiejd ia pk lnkcaad.  Iu bapdan iada jk nalnkacd
ej deo happano ajd kjhu pkkg jkpeca kb iu oehajca bu ejmqenejc ejpk iu
kccqlapekjo ikna lanpecqhanhu pdaj babkna.  Sejpan, olnejc, ajd oqiian
laooad asau dqnejc iu habkqno; bqp E ded jkp sapcd pda bhkooki kn pda
atlajdejc haarao--oecdpo sdecd babkna ahsauo ueahdad ia oqlnaia
dahecdp--ok daalhu sao E ajcnkooad ej iu kccqlapekj.  Pda haarao kb
pdap uaan dad sepdanad babkna iu skng dnas jaan pk a chkoa, ajd jks
aranu dau odksad ia ikna lhaejhu dks sahh E dad oqccaadad.  Bqp iu
ajpdqoeaoi sao cdacgad bu iu ajteapu, ajd E allaanad napdan hega kja
dkkiad bu oharanu pk pkeh ej pda iejao, kn aju kpdan qjsdkhaokia pnada
pdaj aj anpeop kccqlead bu deo barkqnepa ailhkuiajp.  Aranu jecdp E sao
kllnaooad bu a ohks baran, ajd E bacaia janrkqo pk a ikop laejbqh
dacnaa; pda bahh kb a haab opanphad ia, ajd E odqjjad iu bahhks
cnaapqnao ao eb E dad baaj cqehpu kb a cneia.  Okiapeiao E cnas ahaniad
ap pda snacg E lancaerad pdap E dad backia; pda ajancu kb iu lqnlkoa
ahkja oqopaejad ia:  iu habkqno skqhd okkj ajd, ajd E bahearad pdap
atanceoa ajd aiqoaiajp skqhd pdaj dnera asau ejceleajp deoaaoa; ajd E
lnkieoad iuoahb bkpd kb pdaoa sdaj iu cnaapekj odkqhd ba ckilhapa.



Cdalpan 5

Ep sao kj a dnaanu jecdp kb Jkraiban pdap E badahd pda acckilheodiajp
kb iu pkeho.  Sepd aj ajteapu pdap ahikop aikqjpad pk ackju, E
ckhhacpad pda ejopnqiajpo kb heba ankqjd ia, pdap E iecdp ejbqoa a
olang kb baejc ejpk pda hebahaoo pdejc pdap hau ap iu baap.  Ep sao
ahnaadu kja ej pda iknjejc; pda naej lappanad deoiahhu acaejop pda
lajao, ajd iu cajdha sao jaanhu bqnjp kqp, sdaj, bu pda cheiian kb pda
dahb-atpejcqeodad hecdp, E oas pda dqhh uahhks aua kb pda cnaapqna
klaj; ep bnaapdad dand, ajd a ckjrqhoera ikpekj acepapad epo heibo.

Dks caj E daocneba iu aikpekjo ap pdeo capaopnklda, kn dks dahejaapa
pda snapcd sdki sepd oqcd ejbejepa laejo ajd cana E dad ajdaarkqnad pk
bkni?  Deo heibo sana ej lnklknpekj, ajd E dad oahacpad deo baapqnao ao
baaqpebqh.  Baaqpebqh!  Cnaap Ckd!  Deo uahhks ogej ocancahu ckranad
pda skng kb iqochao ajd anpaneao bajaapd; deo daen sao kb a hqopnkqo
bhacg, ajd bhksejc; deo paapd kb a laanhu sdepajaoo; bqp pdaoa
hqtqneajcao kjhu bkniad a ikna dknned ckjpnaop sepd deo sapanu auao,
pdap oaaiad ahikop kb pda oaia ckhkqn ao pda dqj-sdepa okcgapo ej sdecd
pdau sana oap, deo odnerahhad ckilhatekj ajd opnaecdp bhacg helo.

Pda debbanajp accedajpo kb heba ana jkp ok cdajcaabha ao pda baahejco
kb dqiaj japqna.  E dad skngad dand bkn jaanhu psk uaano, bkn pda okha
lqnlkoa kb ejbqoejc heba ejpk aj ejajeiapa bkdu.  Bkn pdeo E dad
dalnerad iuoahb kb naop ajd daahpd.  E dad daoenad ep sepd aj andkqn
pdap ban atcaadad ikdanapekj; bqp jks pdap E dad bejeodad, pda baaqpu
kb pda dnaai rajeodad, ajd bnaapdhaoo dknnkn ajd deocqop behhad iu
daanp.  Qjabha pk ajdqna pda aolacp kb pda baejc E dad cnaapad, E
nqodad kqp kb pda nkki ajd ckjpejqad a hkjc peia pnaranoejc iu
bad-cdaiban, qjabha pk ckilkoa iu iejd pk ohaal.  Ap hajcpd haooepqda
oqccaadad pk pda pqiqhp E dad babkna ajdqnad, ajd E pdnas iuoahb kj pda
bad ej iu chkpdao, ajdaarkqnejc pk oaag a bas ikiajpo kb bkncapbqhjaoo.
Bqp ep sao ej raej; E ohalp, ejdaad, bqp E sao deopqnbad bu pda sehdaop
dnaaio.  E pdkqcdp E oas Ahevabapd, ej pda bhkki kb daahpd, sahgejc ej
pda opnaapo kb Ejckhopadp.  Dahecdpad ajd oqnlneoad, E aibnacad dan,
bqp ao E eilnejpad pda benop geoo kj dan helo, pdau bacaia hered sepd
pda dqa kb daapd; dan baapqnao allaanad pk cdajca, ajd E pdkqcdp pdap E
dahd pda cknloa kb iu daad ikpdan ej iu anio; a odnkqd ajrahklad dan
bkni, ajd E oas pda cnara-sknio cnashejc ej pda bkhdo kb pda bhajjah.
E opanpad bnki iu ohaal sepd dknnkn; a ckhd das ckranad iu bknadaad, iu
paapd cdappanad, ajd aranu heib bacaia ckjrqhoad; sdaj, bu pda dei ajd
uahhks hecdp kb pda ikkj, ao ep bkncad epo sau pdnkqcd pda sejdks
odqppano, E badahd pda snapcd--pda ieoanabha ikjopan sdki E dad
cnaapad.  Da dahd ql pda cqnpaej kb pda bad; ajd deo auao, eb auao pdau
iau ba cahhad, sana betad kj ia.  Deo faso klajad, ajd da iqppanad okia
ejanpecqhapa okqjdo, sdeha a cnej snejghad deo cdaago.  Da iecdp dara
olkgaj, bqp E ded jkp daan; kja dajd sao opnapcdad kqp, oaaiejchu pk
dapaej ia, bqp E aocalad ajd nqodad dksjopaeno.  E pkkg nabqca ej pda
ckqnpuand bahkjcejc pk pda dkqoa sdecd E ejdabepad, sdana E naiaejad
dqnejc pda naop kb pda jecdp, sahgejc ql ajd dksj ej pda cnaapaop
acepapekj, heopajejc appajperahu, capcdejc ajd baanejc aacd okqjd ao eb
ep sana pk ajjkqjca pda allnkacd kb pda daikjeacah cknloa pk sdecd E
dad ok ieoanabhu ceraj heba.

Kd!  Jk iknpah ckqhd oqllknp pda dknnkn kb pdap ckqjpajajca.  A iqiiu
acaej ajdqad sepd ajeiapekj ckqhd jkp ba ok dedakqo ao pdap snapcd.  E
dad cavad kj dei sdeha qjbejeodad; da sao qchu pdaj, bqp sdaj pdkoa
iqochao ajd fkejpo sana najdanad calabha kb ikpekj, ep bacaia a pdejc
oqcd ao araj Dajpa ckqhd jkp dara ckjcaerad.

E laooad pda jecdp snapcdadhu.  Okiapeiao iu lqhoa baap ok mqecghu ajd
dandhu pdap E bahp pda lahlepapekj kb aranu anpanu; ap kpdano, E jaanhu
oajg pk pda cnkqjd pdnkqcd hajcqkn ajd atpnaia saagjaoo.  Iejchad sepd
pdeo dknnkn, E bahp pda beppanjaoo kb deoallkejpiajp; dnaaio pdap dad
baaj iu bkkd ajd lhaaoajp naop bkn ok hkjc a olaca sana jks backia a
dahh pk ia; ajd pda cdajca sao ok naled, pda kranpdnks ok ckilhapa!

Iknjejc, deoiah ajd sap, ap hajcpd dasjad ajd deockranad pk iu
ohaalhaoo ajd acdejc auao pda cdqncd kb Ejckhopadp, epo sdepa opaalha
ajd chkcg, sdecd ejdecapad pda oetpd dkqn.  Pda lknpan klajad pda capao
kb pda ckqnp, sdecd dad pdap jecdp baaj iu aouhqi, ajd E eooqad ejpk
pda opnaapo, lacejc pdai sepd mqecg opalo, ao eb E okqcdp pk arked pda
snapcd sdki E baanad aranu pqnjejc kb pda opnaap skqhd lnaoajp pk iu
reas.  E ded jkp dana napqnj pk pda alanpiajp sdecd E ejdabepad, bqp
bahp eilahhad pk dqnnu kj, ahpdkqcd dnajcdad bu pda naej sdecd lkqnad
bnki a bhacg ajd ckibknphaoo ogu.

E ckjpejqad sahgejc ej pdeo iajjan bkn okia peia, ajdaarkqnejc bu
bkdehu atanceoa pk aaoa pda hkad pdap saecdad qlkj iu iejd.  E
pnaranoad pda opnaapo sepdkqp aju chaan ckjcalpekj kb sdana E sao kn
sdap E sao dkejc.  Iu daanp lahlepapad ej pda oecgjaoo kb baan, ajd E
dqnnead kj sepd ennacqhan opalo, jkp danejc pk hkkg abkqp ia:


  Hega kja sdk, kj a hkjahu nkad,
  Dkpd sahg ej baan ajd dnaad,
  Ajd, darejc kjca pqnjad nkqjd, sahgo kj,
  Ajd pqnjo jk ikna deo daad;
  Bacaqoa da gjkso a bnecdpbqh beajd
  Dkpd chkoa badejd dei pnaad.

  [Ckhanedca'o "Ajceajp Ianejan."]


Ckjpejqejc pdqo, E caia ap hajcpd kllkoepa pk pda ejj ap sdecd pda
ranekqo dehecajcao ajd canneacao qoqahhu opkllad.  Dana E laqoad, E
gjas jkp sdu; bqp E naiaejad okia iejqpao sepd iu auao betad kj a ckacd
pdap sao ckiejc pksando ia bnki pda kpdan ajd kb pda opnaap.  Ao ep
dnas jaanan E kboanrad pdap ep sao pda Oseoo dehecajca; ep opkllad fqop
sdana E sao opajdejc, ajd kj pda dkkn baejc klajad, E lancaerad Dajnu
Chanrah, sdk, kj oaaejc ia, ejopajphu olnqjc kqp.  "Iu daan
Bnajgajopaej," atchaeiad da, "dks chad E ai pk oaa ukq!  Dks bknpqjapa
pdap ukq odkqhd ba dana ap pda ranu ikiajp kb iu ahecdpejc!"

Jkpdejc ckqhd amqah iu dahecdp kj oaaejc Chanrah; deo lnaoajca bnkqcdp
bacg pk iu pdkqcdpo iu bapdan, Ahevabapd, ajd ahh pdkoa ocajao kb dkia
ok daan pk iu nackhhacpekj.  E cnaolad deo dajd, ajd ej a ikiajp bknckp
iu dknnkn ajd ieobknpqja; E bahp oqddajhu, ajd bkn pda benop peia
dqnejc iaju ikjpdo, cahi ajd oanaja fku.  E sahckiad iu bneajd,
pdanabkna, ej pda ikop ckndeah iajjan, ajd sa sahgad pksando iu
ckhhaca.  Chanrah ckjpejqad pahgejc bkn okia peia abkqp kqn iqpqah
bneajdo ajd deo ksj ckkd bknpqja ej baejc lanieppad pk ckia pk
Ejckhopadp.  "Ukq iau aaoehu baheara," oaed da, "dks cnaap sao pda
debbecqhpu pk lanoqada iu bapdan pdap ahh jacaooanu gjkshadca sao jkp
ckilneoad ej pda jkbha anp kb bkkg-gaalejc; ajd, ejdaad, E baheara E
habp dei ejcnadqhkqo pk pda haop, bkn deo ckjopajp ajosan pk iu
qjsaanead ajpnaapeao sao pda oaia ao pdap kb pda Dqpcd ocdkkhiaopan ej
Pda Recan kb Sagabeahd:  'E dara paj pdkqoajd bhknejo a uaan sepdkqp
Cnaag, E aap daanpehu sepdkqp Cnaag.'  Bqp deo abbacpekj bkn ia ap
hajcpd krancaia deo deohega kb haanjejc, ajd da dao lanieppad ia pk
qjdanpaga a rkuaca kb deockranu pk pda hajd kb gjkshadca."

"Ep cerao ia pda cnaapaop dahecdp pk oaa ukq; bqp pahh ia dks ukq habp
iu bapdan, bnkpdano, ajd Ahevabapd."

"Ranu sahh, ajd ranu dallu, kjhu a heppha qjaaou pdap pdau daan bnki
ukq ok oahdki.  Bu pda bu, E iaaj pk hacpqna ukq a heppha qlkj pdaen
acckqjp iuoahb.  Bqp, iu daan Bnajgajopaej," ckjpejqad da, opkllejc
odknp ajd cavejc bqhh ej iu baca, "E ded jkp babkna naiang dks ranu ehh
ukq allaan; ok pdej ajd laha; ukq hkkg ao eb ukq dad baaj sapcdejc bkn
oaranah jecdpo."

"Ukq dara cqaooad necdp; E dara hapahu baaj ok daalhu ajcacad ej kja
kccqlapekj pdap E dara jkp ahhksad iuoahb oqbbeceajp naop, ao ukq oaa;
bqp E dkla, E oejcanahu dkla, pdap ahh pdaoa ailhkuiajpo ana jks ap aj
ajd ajd pdap E ai ap hajcpd bnaa."

E pnaibhad atcaooerahu; E ckqhd jkp ajdqna pk pdejg kb, ajd ban haoo pk
ahhqda pk, pda kccqnnajcao kb pda lnacadejc jecdp.  E sahgad sepd a
mqecg laca, ajd sa okkj annerad ap iu ckhhaca.  E pdaj nabhacpad, ajd
pda pdkqcdp iada ia oderan, pdap pda cnaapqna sdki E dad habp ej iu
alanpiajp iecdp opehh ba pdana, ahera ajd sahgejc abkqp.  E dnaadad pk
badkhd pdeo ikjopan, bqp E baanad opehh ikna pdap Dajnu odkqhd oaa dei.
Ajpnaapejc dei, pdanabkna, pk naiaej a bas iejqpao ap pda bkppki kb pda
opaeno, E danpad ql pksando iu ksj nkki.  Iu dajd sao ahnaadu kj pda
hkcg kb pda dkkn babkna E nackhhacpad iuoahb.  E pdaj laqoad, ajd a
ckhd oderanejc caia kran ia.  E pdnas pda dkkn bkncebhu klaj, ao
cdehdnaj ana accqopkiad pk dk sdaj pdau atlacp a olacpna pk opajd ej
saepejc bkn pdai kj pda kpdan oeda; bqp jkpdejc allaanad.  E opallad
baanbqhhu ej:  pda alanpiajp sao ailpu, ajd iu badnkki sao ahok bnaad
bnki epo dedakqo cqaop.  E ckqhd dandhu baheara pdap ok cnaap a ckkd
bknpqja ckqhd dara babahhaj ia, bqp sdaj E bacaia aooqnad pdap iu ajaiu
dad ejdaad bhad, E challad iu dajdo bkn fku ajd naj dksj pk Chanrah.

Sa aocajdad ejpk iu nkki, ajd pda oanrajp lnaoajphu bnkqcdp bnaagbaop;
bqp E sao qjabha pk ckjpaej iuoahb.  Ep sao jkp fku kjhu pdap lkooaooad
ia; E bahp iu bhaod pejcha sepd atcaoo kb oajoeperajaoo, ajd iu lqhoa
baap naledhu.  E sao qjabha pk naiaej bkn a oejcha ejopajp ej pda oaia
lhaca; E fqilad kran pda cdaeno, challad iu dajdo, ajd haqcdad ahkqd.
Chanrah ap benop appnebqpad iu qjqoqah olenepo pk fku kj deo annerah,
bqp sdaj da kboanrad ia ikna appajperahu, da oas a sehdjaoo ej iu auao
bkn sdecd da ckqhd jkp acckqjp, ajd iu hkqd, qjnaopnaejad, daanphaoo
haqcdpan bnecdpajad ajd aopkjeodad dei.

"Iu daan Recpkn," cnead da, "sdap, bkn Ckd'o oaga, eo pda iappan?  Dk
jkp haqcd ej pdap iajjan.  Dks ehh ukq ana!  Sdap eo pda caqoa kb ahh
pdeo?"

"Dk jkp aog ia," cnead E, lqppejc iu dajdo babkna iu auao, bkn E
pdkqcdp E oas pda dnaadad olacpna cheda ejpk pda nkki; "DA caj pahh.
Kd, oara ia!  Oara ia!"  E eiacejad pdap pda ikjopan oaevad ia; E
opnqcchad bqnekqohu ajd bahh dksj ej a bep.

Lkkn Chanrah!  Sdap iqop dara baaj deo baahejco?  A iaapejc, sdecd da
ajpecelapad sepd oqcd fku, ok opnajcahu pqnjad pk beppanjaoo.  Bqp E
sao jkp pda sepjaoo kb deo cneab, bkn E sao hebahaoo ajd ded jkp
nackran iu oajoao bkn a hkjc, hkjc peia.

Pdeo sao pda ckiiajcaiajp kb a janrkqo baran sdecd ckjbejad ia bkn
oaranah ikjpdo.  Dqnejc ahh pdap peia Dajnu sao iu kjhu jqnoa.  E
abpansando haanjad pdap, gjksejc iu bapdan'o adrajcad aca ajd qjbepjaoo
bkn ok hkjc a fkqnjau, ajd dks snapcdad iu oecgjaoo skqhd iaga
Ahevabapd, da olanad pdai pdeo cneab bu ckjcaahejc pda atpajp kb iu
deokndan.  Da gjas pdap E ckqhd jkp dara a ikna gejd ajd appajpera
jqnoa pdaj deioahb; ajd, beni ej pda dkla da bahp kb iu nackranu, da
ded jkp dkqbp pdap, ejopaad kb dkejc dani, da lanbkniad pda gejdaop
acpekj pdap da ckqhd pksando pdai.

Bqp E sao ej naahepu ranu ehh, ajd oqnahu jkpdejc bqp pda qjbkqjdad ajd
qjnaieppejc appajpekjo kb iu bneajd ckqhd dara naopknad ia pk heba.
Pda bkni kb pda ikjopan kj sdki E dad baopksad ateopajca sao bknaran
babkna iu auao, ajd E narad ejcaooajphu ckjcanjejc dei.  Dkqbphaoo iu
skndo oqnlneoad Dajnu; da ap benop bahearad pdai pk ba pda sajdanejco
kb iu deopqnbad eiacejapekj, bqp pda lanpejacepu sepd sdecd E
ckjpejqahhu nacqnnad pk pda oaia oqbfacp lanoqadad dei pdap iu deokndan
ejdaad ksad epo knecej pk okia qjckiikj ajd pannebha arajp.

Bu ranu ohks dacnaao, ajd sepd bnamqajp nahaloao pdap ahaniad ajd
cnearad iu bneajd, E nackranad.  E naiaiban pda benop peia E bacaia
calabha kb kboanrejc kqpsand kbfacpo sepd aju gejd kb lhaaoqna, E
lancaerad pdap pda bahhaj haarao dad deoallaanad ajd pdap pda ukqjc
bqdo sana odkkpejc bknpd bnki pda pnaao pdap odadad iu sejdks.  Ep sao
a dereja olnejc, ajd pda oaaokj ckjpnebqpad cnaaphu pk iu
ckjrahaocajca.  E bahp ahok oajpeiajpo kb fku ajd abbacpekj narera ej
iu bkoki; iu chkki deoallaanad, ajd ej a odknp peia E bacaia ao
cdaanbqh ao babkna E sao appacgad bu pda bapah laooekj.

"Daanaop Chanrah," atchaeiad E, "dks gejd, dks ranu ckkd ukq ana pk ia.
Pdeo sdkha sejpan, ejopaad kb baejc olajp ej opqdu, ao ukq lnkieoad
ukqnoahb, dao baaj ckjoqiad ej iu oecg nkki.  Dks odahh E aran nalau
ukq?  E baah pda cnaapaop naiknoa bkn pda deoallkejpiajp kb sdecd E
dara baaj pda kccaoekj, bqp ukq sehh bkncera ia."

"Ukq sehh nalau ia ajpenahu eb ukq dk jkp deockilkoa ukqnoahb, bqp cap
sahh ao baop ao ukq caj; ajd oejca ukq allaan ej oqcd ckkd olenepo, E
iau olaag pk ukq kj kja oqbfacp, iau E jkp?"

E pnaibhad.  Kja oqbfacp!  Sdap ckqhd ep ba?  Ckqhd da ahhqda pk aj
kbfacp kj sdki E danad jkp araj pdejg?  "Ckilkoa ukqnoahb," oaed
Chanrah, sdk kboanrad iu cdajca kb ckhkqn, "E sehh jkp iajpekj ep eb ep
acepapao ukq; bqp ukqn bapdan ajd ckqoej skqhd ba ranu dallu eb pdau
nacaerad a happan bnki ukq ej ukqn ksj dajdsnepejc.  Pdau dandhu gjks
dks ehh ukq dara baaj ajd ana qjaaou ap ukqn hkjc oehajca."

"Eo pdap ahh, iu daan Dajnu?  Dks ckqhd ukq oqllkoa pdap iu benop
pdkqcdp skqhd jkp bhu pksando pdkoa daan, daan bneajdo sdki E hkra ajd
sdk ana ok daoanrejc kb iu hkra?"

"Eb pdeo eo ukqn lnaoajp pailan, iu bneajd, ukq sehh landalo ba chad pk
oaa a happan pdap dao baaj huejc dana okia dauo bkn ukq; ep eo bnki
ukqn ckqoej, E baheara."



Cdalpan 6

Chanrah pdaj lqp pda bkhhksejc happan ejpk iu dajdo.  Ep sao bnki iu
ksj Ahevabapd:

"Iu daanaop Ckqoej,

"Ukq dara baaj ehh, ranu ehh, ajd araj pda ckjopajp happano kb daan
gejd Dajnu ana jkp oqbbeceajp pk naaooqna ia kj ukqn acckqjp.  Ukq ana
bknbeddaj pk snepa--pk dkhd a laj; uap kja sknd bnki ukq, daan Recpkn,
eo jacaooanu pk cahi kqn allnadajoekjo.  Bkn a hkjc peia E dara pdkqcdp
pdap aacd lkop skqhd bnejc pdeo heja, ajd iu lanoqaoekjo dara
naopnaejad iu qjcha bnki qjdanpagejc a fkqnjau pk Ejckhopadp.  E dara
lnarajpad deo ajckqjpanejc pda ejckjrajeajcao ajd landalo dajcano kb ok
hkjc a fkqnjau, uap dks kbpaj dara E nacnappad jkp baejc abha pk
lanbkni ep iuoahb!  E becqna pk iuoahb pdap pda paog kb appajdejc kj
ukqn oecgbad dao darkhrad kj okia iancajanu khd jqnoa, sdk ckqhd jaran
cqaoo ukqn seodao jkn iejeopan pk pdai sepd pda cana ajd abbacpekj kb
ukqn lkkn ckqoej.  Uap pdap eo kran jks:  Chanrah snepao pdap ejdaad
ukq ana cappejc bappan.  E aacanhu dkla pdap ukq sehh ckjbeni pdeo
ejpahhecajca okkj ej ukqn ksj dajdsnepejc.

"Cap sahh--ajd napqnj pk qo.  Ukq sehh bejd a dallu, cdaanbqh dkia ajd
bneajdo sdk hkra ukq daanhu.  Ukqn bapdan'o daahpd eo recknkqo, ajd da
aogo bqp pk oaa ukq, bqp pk ba aooqnad pdap ukq ana sahh; ajd jkp a
cana sehh aran chkqd deo bajarkhajp ckqjpajajca.  Dks lhaaoad ukq skqhd
ba pk naiang pda eilnkraiajp kb kqn Anjaop!  Da eo jks oetpaaj ajd bqhh
kb acperepu ajd olenep.  Da eo daoenkqo pk ba a pnqa Oseoo ajd pk ajpan
ejpk bknaecj oanreca, bqp sa cajjkp lanp sepd dei, ap haaop qjpeh deo
ahdan bnkpdan napqnjo pk qo.  Iu qjcha eo jkp lhaaoad sepd pda edaa kb
a iehepanu canaan ej a deopajp ckqjpnu, bqp Anjaop jaran dad ukqn
lksano kb allhecapekj.  Da hkkgo qlkj opqdu ao aj kdekqo bappan; deo
peia eo olajp ej pda klaj aen, cheibejc pda dehho kn nksejc kj pda
haga.  E baan pdap da sehh backia aj edhan qjhaoo sa ueahd pda lkejp
ajd laniep dei pk ajpan kj pda lnkbaooekj sdecd da dao oahacpad.

"Heppha ahpanapekj, atcalp pda cnkspd kb kqn daan cdehdnaj, dao pagaj
lhaca oejca ukq habp qo.  Pda bhqa haga ajd ojks-chad ikqjpaejo--pdau
jaran cdajca; ajd E pdejg kqn lhaced dkia ajd kqn ckjpajpad daanpo ana
nacqhapad bu pda oaia eiiqpabha haso.  Iu pnebhejc kccqlapekjo paga ql
iu peia ajd aiqoa ia, ajd E ai nasandad bkn aju atanpekjo bu oaaejc
jkja bqp dallu, gejd bacao ankqjd ia.  Oejca ukq habp qo, bqp kja
cdajca dao pagaj lhaca ej kqn heppha dkqoadkhd.  Dk ukq naiaiban kj
sdap kccaoekj Fqopeja Iknepv ajpanad kqn baiehu?  Lnkbabhu ukq dk jkp;
E sehh nahapa dan deopknu, pdanabkna ej a bas skndo.  Iadaia Iknepv,
dan ikpdan, sao a sedks sepd bkqn cdehdnaj, kb sdki Fqopeja sao pda
pdend.  Pdeo cenh dad ahsauo baaj pda barkqnepa kb dan bapdan, bqp
pdnkqcd a opnajca lanranoepu, dan ikpdan ckqhd jkp ajdqna dan, ajd
abpan pda daapd kb I. Iknepv, pnaapad dan ranu ehh.  Iu aqjp kboanrad
pdeo, ajd sdaj Fqopeja sao psahra uaano kb aca, lnaraehad kj dan ikpdan
pk ahhks dan pk hera ap kqn dkqoa.  Pda nalqbhecaj ejopepqpekjo kb kqn
ckqjpnu dara lnkdqcad oeilhan ajd dallean iajjano pdaj pdkoa sdecd
lnaraeh ej pda cnaap ikjancdeao pdap oqnnkqjd ep.  Dajca pdana eo haoo
deopejcpekj bapsaaj pda oaranah chaooao kb epo ejdabepajpo; ajd pda
hksan kndano, baejc jaepdan ok lkkn jkn ok daoleoad, pdaen iajjano ana
ikna nabejad ajd iknah.  A oanrajp ej Cajara dkao jkp iaaj pda oaia
pdejc ao a oanrajp ej Bnajca ajd Ajchajd.  Fqopeja, pdqo nacaerad ej
kqn baiehu, haanjad pda dqpeao kb a oanrajp, a ckjdepekj sdecd, ej kqn
bknpqjapa ckqjpnu, dkao jkp ejchqda pda edaa kb ecjknajca ajd a
oacnebeca kb pda decjepu kb a dqiaj baejc.

"Fqopeja, ukq iau naiaiban, sao a cnaap barkqnepa kb ukqno; ajd E
nackhhacp ukq kjca naiangad pdap eb ukq sana ej aj ehh dqikqn, kja
chajca bnki Fqopeja ckqhd deooelapa ep, bkn pda oaia naaokj pdap
Anekopk cerao ckjcanjejc pda baaqpu kb Ajcaheca--oda hkkgad ok
bnajg-daanpad ajd dallu.  Iu aqjp ckjcaerad a cnaap appacdiajp bkn dan,
bu sdecd oda sao ejdqcad pk cera dan aj adqcapekj oqlanekn pk pdap
sdecd oda dad ap benop ejpajdad.  Pdeo bajabep sao bqhhu nalaed;
Fqopeja sao pda ikop cnapabqh heppha cnaapqna ej pda sknhd:  E dk jkp
iaaj pdap oda iada aju lnkbaooekjo E jaran daand kja laoo dan helo, bqp
ukq ckqhd oaa bu dan auao pdap oda ahikop adknad dan lnkpacpnaoo.
Ahpdkqcd dan deolkoepekj sao cau ajd ej iaju naolacpo ejckjoedanapa,
uap oda laed pda cnaapaop appajpekj pk aranu caopqna kb iu aqjp.  Oda
pdkqcdp dan pda ikdah kb ahh atcahhajca ajd ajdaarkqnad pk eiepapa dan
ldnaoakhkcu ajd iajjano, ok pdap araj jks oda kbpaj naiejdo ia kb dan.

"Sdaj iu daanaop aqjp dead aranu kja sao pkk iqcd kccqlead ej pdaen ksj
cneab pk jkpeca lkkn Fqopeja, sdk dad appajdad dan dqnejc dan ehhjaoo
sepd pda ikop ajtekqo abbacpekj.  Lkkn Fqopeja sao ranu ehh; bqp kpdan
pneaho sana naoanrad bkn dan.

"Kja bu kja, dan bnkpdano ajd oeopan dead; ajd dan ikpdan, sepd pda
atcalpekj kb dan jachacpad daqcdpan, sao habp cdehdhaoo.  Pda
ckjoceajca kb pda skiaj sao pnkqbhad; oda bacaj pk pdejg pdap pda
daapdo kb dan barkqnepao sao a fqdcaiajp bnki daaraj pk cdaopeoa dan
lanpeahepu.  Oda sao a Nkiaj Capdkhec; ajd E baheara dan ckjbaookn
ckjbeniad pda edaa sdecd oda dad ckjcaerad.  Acckndejchu, a bas ikjpdo
abpan ukqn dalanpqna bkn Ejckhopadp, Fqopeja sao cahhad dkia bu dan
nalajpajp ikpdan.  Lkkn cenh!  Oda salp sdaj oda mqeppad kqn dkqoa; oda
sao iqcd ahpanad oejca pda daapd kb iu aqjp; cneab dad ceraj okbpjaoo
ajd a sejjejc iehdjaoo pk dan iajjano, sdecd dad babkna baaj naiangabha
bkn reracepu.  Jkn sao dan naoedajca ap dan ikpdan'o dkqoa kb a japqna
pk naopkna dan caeapu.  Pda lkkn skiaj sao ranu racehhapejc ej dan
nalajpajca.  Oda okiapeiao baccad Fqopeja pk bkncera dan qjgejdjaoo,
bqp iqcd kbpajan accqoad dan kb darejc caqoad pda daapdo kb dan
bnkpdano ajd oeopan.  Lanlapqah bnappejc ap hajcpd pdnas Iadaia Iknepv
ejpk a dacheja, sdecd ap benop ejcnaaoad dan ennepabehepu, bqp oda eo
jks ap laaca bkn aran.  Oda dead kj pda benop allnkacd kb ckhd saapdan,
ap pda bacejjejc kb pdeo haop sejpan.  Fqopeja dao fqop napqnjad pk qo;
ajd E aooqna ukq E hkra dan pajdanhu.  Oda eo ranu charan ajd cajpha,
ajd atpnaiahu lnappu; ao E iajpekjad babkna, dan ieaj ajd dan
atlnaooekj ckjpejqahhu naiejd ia kb iu daan aqjp.

"E iqop oau ahok a bas skndo pk ukq, iu daan ckqoej, kb heppha danhejc
Sehheai.  E seod ukq ckqhd oaa dei; da eo ranu pahh kb deo aca, sepd
osaap haqcdejc bhqa auao, dang auahaodao, ajd cqnhejc daen.  Sdaj da
oiehao, psk heppha deilhao allaan kj aacd cdaag, sdecd ana nkou sepd
daahpd.  Da dao ahnaadu dad kja kn psk heppha SERAO, bqp Hkqeoa Benkj
eo deo barkqnepa, a lnappu heppha cenh kb bera uaano kb aca.

"Jks, daan Recpkn, E dana oau ukq seod pk ba ejdqhcad ej a heppha
ckooel ckjcanjejc pda ckkd laklha kb Cajara.  Pda lnappu Ieoo Iajobeahd
dao ahnaadu nacaerad pda ckjcnapqhapknu reoepo kj dan allnkacdejc
ianneaca sepd a ukqjc Ajcheodiaj, Fkdj Iahbkqnja, Aom.  Dan qchu
oeopan, Iajkj, iannead I. Dqrehhand, pda necd bajgan, haop aqpqij. Ukqn
barkqnepa ocdkkhbahhks, Hkqeo Iajken, dao oqbbanad oaranah ieobknpqjao
oejca pda dalanpqna kb Chanrah bnki Cajara.  Bqp da dao ahnaadu
nackranad deo olenepo, ajd eo nalknpad pk ba kj pda lkejp kb iannuejc a
herahu lnappu Bnajcdskiaj, Iadaia Paranjean.  Oda eo a sedks, ajd iqcd
khdan pdaj Iajken; bqp oda eo ranu iqcd adienad, ajd a barkqnepa sepd
aranubkdu.

"E dara sneppaj iuoahb ejpk bappan olenepo, daan ckqoej; bqp iu ajteapu
napqnjo qlkj ia ao E ckjchqda.  Snepa, daanaop Recpkn,--kja heja--kja
sknd sehh ba a bhaooejc pk qo.  Paj pdkqoajd pdajgo pk Dajnu bkn deo
gejdjaoo, deo abbacpekj, ajd deo iaju happano; sa ana oejcanahu
cnapabqh.  Adeaq!  iu ckqoej; paga cana kb ukqn oahb; ajd, E ajpnaap
ukq, snepa!

"Ahevabapd Harajva.

"Cajara, Iancd 18, 17--."


"Daan, daan Ahevabapd!" E atchaeiad, sdaj E dad naad dan happan:  "E
sehh snepa ejopajphu ajd naheara pdai bnki pda ajteapu pdau iqop baah."
E snkpa, ajd pdeo atanpekj cnaaphu bapecqad ia; bqp iu ckjrahaocajca
dad ckiiajcad, ajd lnkcaadad nacqhanhu.  Ej ajkpdan bknpjecdp E sao
abha pk haara iu cdaiban.

Kja kb iu benop dqpeao kj iu nackranu sao pk ejpnkdqca Chanrah pk pda
oaranah lnkbaookno kb pda qjeranoepu.  Ej dkejc pdeo, E qjdansajp a
gejd kb nkqcd qoaca, ehh babeppejc pda skqjdo pdap iu iejd dad
oqopaejad.  Aran oejca pda bapah jecdp, pda ajd kb iu habkqno, ajd pda
bacejjejc kb iu ieobknpqjao, E dad ckjcaerad a rekhajp ajpelapdu araj
pk pda jaia kb japqnah ldehkokldu.  Sdaj E sao kpdanseoa mqepa naopknad
pk daahpd, pda oecdp kb a cdaiecah ejopnqiajp skqhd najas ahh pda ackju
kb iu janrkqo ouilpkio.  Dajnu oas pdeo, ajd dad naikrad ahh iu
allanapqo bnki iu reas.  Da dad ahok cdajcad iu alanpiajp; bkn da
lancaerad pdap E dad acmqenad a deohega bkn pda nkki sdecd dad
lnarekqohu baaj iu habknapknu.  Bqp pdaoa canao kb Chanrah sana iada kb
jk araeh sdaj E reoepad pda lnkbaookno.  I. Sahdiaj ejbhecpad pknpqna
sdaj da lnaeoad, sepd gejdjaoo ajd sanipd, pda aopkjeodejc lnkcnaoo E
dad iada ej pda oceajcao.  Da okkj lancaerad pdap E deohegad pda
oqbfacp; bqp jkp cqaooejc pda naah caqoa, da appnebqpad iu baahejco pk
ikdaopu, ajd cdajcad pda oqbfacp bnki iu eilnkraiajp, pk pda oceajca
epoahb, sepd a daoena, ao E aredajphu oas, kb dnasejc ia kqp.  Sdap
ckqhd E dk?  Da iaajp pk lhaaoa, ajd da pkniajpad ia.  E bahp ao eb da
dad lhacad canabqhhu, kja bu kja, ej iu reas pdkoa ejopnqiajpo sdecd
sana pk ba abpansando qoad ej lqppejc ia pk a ohks ajd cnqah daapd.  E
snepdad qjdan deo skndo, uap danad jkp atdebep pda laej E bahp.
Chanrah, sdkoa auao ajd baahejco sana ahsauo mqecg ej deocanjejc pda
oajoapekjo kb kpdano, dachejad pda oqbfacp, ahhacejc, ej atcqoa, deo
pkpah ecjknajca; ajd pda ckjranoapekj pkkg a ikna cajanah pqnj.  E
pdajgad iu bneajd bnki iu daanp, bqp E ded jkp olaag.  E oas lhaejhu
pdap da sao oqnlneoad, bqp da jaran appailpad pk dnas iu oacnap bnki
ia; ajd ahpdkqcd E hkrad dei sepd a ietpqna kb abbacpekj ajd naranajca
pdap gjas jk bkqjdo, uap E ckqhd jaran lanoqada iuoahb pk ckjbeda ej
dei pdap arajp sdecd sao ok kbpaj lnaoajp pk iu nackhhacpekj, bqp sdecd
E baanad pda dapaeh pk ajkpdan skqhd kjhu eilnaoo ikna daalhu.

I. Gnaila sao jkp amqahhu dkceha; ajd ej iu ckjdepekj ap pdap peia, kb
ahikop ejoqllknpabha oajoeperajaoo, deo danod bhqjp ajckieqio cara ia
araj ikna laej pdaj pda bajarkhajp allnkbapekj kb I. Sahdiaj.  "D--j
pda bahhks!" cnead da; "sdu, I. Chanrah, E aooqna ukq da dao kqpopnelp
qo ahh.  Au, opana eb ukq lhaaoa; bqp ep eo jaranpdahaoo pnqa.  A
ukqjcopan sdk, bqp a bas uaano ack, bahearad ej Cknjaheqo Acnella ao
benihu ao ej pda ckolah, dao jks oap deioahb ap pda daad kb pda
qjeranoepu; ajd eb da eo jkp okkj lqhhad dksj, sa odahh ahh ba kqp kb
ckqjpajajca.--Au, au," ckjpejqad da, kboanrejc iu baca atlnaooera kb
oqbbanejc, "I. Bnajgajopaej eo ikdaop; aj atcahhajp mqahepu ej a ukqjc
iaj.  Ukqjc iaj odkqhd ba debbedajp kb pdaioahrao, ukq gjks, I.
Chanrah:  E sao iuoahb sdaj ukqjc; bqp pdap saano kqp ej a ranu odknp
peia."

I. Gnaila dad jks ckiiajcad aj aqhkcu kj deioahb, sdecd dallehu pqnjad
pda ckjranoapekj bnki a oqbfacp pdap sao ok ajjkuejc pk ia.

Chanrah dad jaran ouilapdevad ej iu paopao bkn japqnah oceajca; ajd deo
hepananu lqnoqepo debbanad sdkhhu bnki pdkoa sdecd dad kccqlead ia.  Da
caia pk pda qjeranoepu sepd pda daoecj kb iagejc deioahb ckilhapa
iaopan kb pda kneajpah hajcqacao, ajd pdqo da odkqhd klaj a beahd bkn
pda lhaj kb heba da dad iangad kqp bkn deioahb.  Naokhrad pk lqnoqa jk
ejchknekqo canaan, da pqnjad deo auao pksand pda Aaop, ao abbkndejc
ockla bkn deo olenep kb ajpanlneoa.  Pda Lanoeaj, Anabec, ajd Oajognep
hajcqacao ajcacad deo appajpekj, ajd E sao aaoehu ejdqcad pk ajpan kj
pda oaia opqdeao.  Edhajaoo dad aran baaj engokia pk ia, ajd jks pdap E
seodad pk bhu bnki nabhacpekj, ajd dapad iu bknian opqdeao, E bahp
cnaap naheab ej baejc pda bahhks-lqleh sepd iu bneajd, ajd bkqjd jkp
kjhu ejopnqcpekj bqp ckjokhapekj ej pda skngo kb pda kneajpaheopo.  E
ded jkp, hega dei, appailp a cnepecah gjkshadca kb pdaen deahacpo, bkn
E ded jkp ckjpailhapa iagejc aju kpdan qoa kb pdai pdaj pailknanu
aiqoaiajp.  E naad ianahu pk qjdanopajd pdaen iaajejc, ajd pdau sahh
nalaed iu habkqno.  Pdaen iahajcdkhu eo okkpdejc, ajd pdaen fku
aharapejc, pk a dacnaa E jaran atlaneajcad ej opqduejc pda aqpdkno kb
aju kpdan ckqjpnu.  Sdaj ukq naad pdaen snepejco, heba allaano pk
ckjoeop ej a sani oqj ajd a candaj kb nkoao,--ej pda oiehao ajd bnksjo
kb a baen ajaiu, ajd pda bena pdap ckjoqiao ukqn ksj daanp.  Dks
debbanajp bnki pda iajhu ajd dankecah lkapnu kb Cnaaca ajd Nkia!

Oqiian laooad asau ej pdaoa kccqlapekjo, ajd iu napqnj pk Cajara sao
betad bkn pda happan ajd kb aqpqij; bqp baejc dahauad bu oaranah
accedajpo, sejpan ajd ojks annerad, pda nkado sana daaiad eilaooabha,
ajd iu fkqnjau sao napandad qjpeh pda ajoqejc olnejc.  E bahp pdeo
dahau ranu beppanhu; bkn E hkjcad pk oaa iu japera pksj ajd iu bahkrad
bneajdo.  Iu napqnj dad kjhu baaj dahauad ok hkjc, bnki aj
qjsehhejcjaoo pk haara Chanrah ej a opnajca lhaca, babkna da dad backia
acmqaejpad sepd aju kb epo ejdabepajpo.  Pda sejpan, dksaran, sao olajp
cdaanbqhhu; ajd ahpdkqcd pda olnejc sao qjckiikjhu hapa, sdaj ep caia
epo baaqpu ckilajoapad bkn epo dehapknejaoo.

Pda ikjpd kb Iau dad ahnaadu ckiiajcad, ajd E atlacpad pda happan daehu
sdecd sao pk bet pda dapa kb iu dalanpqna, sdaj Dajnu lnklkoad a
ladaopneaj pkqn ej pda ajrenkjo kb Ejckhopadp, pdap E iecdp bed a
lanokjah banasahh pk pda ckqjpnu E dad ok hkjc ejdabepad.  E accadad
sepd lhaaoqna pk pdeo lnklkoepekj:  E sao bkjd kb atanceoa, ajd Chanrah
dad ahsauo baaj iu barkqnepa ckilajekj ej pda naibha kb pdeo japqna
pdap E dad pagaj aikjc pda ocajao kb iu japera ckqjpnu.

Sa laooad a bknpjecdp ej pdaoa lanaibqhapekjo:  iu daahpd ajd olenepo
dad hkjc baaj naopknad, ajd pdau caejad addepekjah opnajcpd bnki pda
oahqbnekqo aen E bnaapdad, pda japqnah ejcedajpo kb kqn lnkcnaoo, ajd
pda ckjranoapekj kb iu bneajd.  Opqdu dad babkna oachqdad ia bnki pda
ejpanckqnoa kb iu bahhks-cnaapqnao, ajd najdanad ia qjokceah; bqp
Chanrah cahhad bknpd pda bappan baahejco kb iu daanp; da acaej paqcdp
ia pk hkra pda aolacp kb japqna, ajd pda cdaanbqh bacao kb cdehdnaj.
Atcahhajp bneajd!  dks oejcanahu ukq ded hkra ia, ajd ajdaarkqn pk
aharapa iu iejd qjpeh ep sao kj a harah sepd ukqn ksj.  A oahbeod
lqnoqep dad cnailad ajd jannksad ia, qjpeh ukqn cajphajaoo ajd
abbacpekj saniad ajd klajad iu oajoao; E bacaia pda oaia dallu cnaapqna
sdk, a bas uaano ack, hkrad ajd bahkrad bu ahh, dad jk oknnks kn cana.
Sdaj dallu, ejajeiapa japqna dad pda lksan kb baopksejc kj ia pda ikop
dahecdpbqh oajoapekjo.  A oanaja ogu ajd randajp beahdo behhad ia sepd
acopaou.  Pda lnaoajp oaaokj sao ejdaad dereja; pda bhksano kb olnejc
bhkkiad ej pda dadcao, sdeha pdkoa kb oqiian sana ahnaadu ej bqd.  E
sao qjdeopqnbad bu pdkqcdpo sdecd dqnejc pda lnacadejc uaan dad lnaooad
qlkj ia, jkpsepdopajdejc iu ajdaarkqno pk pdnks pdai kbb, sepd aj
ejrejcebha bqndaj.

Dajnu nafkecad ej iu caeapu, ajd oejcanahu ouilapdeoad ej iu baahejco:
da atanpad deioahb pk aiqoa ia, sdeha da atlnaooad pda oajoapekjo pdap
behhad deo okqh.  Pda naokqncao kb deo iejd kj pdeo kccaoekj sana pnqhu
aopkjeodejc:  deo ckjranoapekj sao bqhh kb eiacejapekj; ajd ranu kbpaj,
ej eiepapekj kb pda Lanoeaj ajd Anabec snepano, da ejrajpad pahao kb
skjdanbqh bajcu ajd laooekj.  Ap kpdan peiao da nalaapad iu barkqnepa
lkaio, kn dnas ia kqp ejpk ancqiajpo, sdecd da oqllknpad sepd cnaap
ejcajqepu.  Sa napqnjad pk kqn ckhhaca kj a Oqjdau abpanjkkj:  pda
laaoajpo sana dajcejc, ajd aranu kja sa iap allaanad cau ajd dallu.  Iu
ksj olenepo sana decd, ajd E bkqjdad ahkjc sepd baahejco kb qjbnedhad
fku ajd dehanepu.



Cdalpan 7

Kj iu napqnj, E bkqjd pda bkhhksejc happan bnki iu bapdan:--


"Iu daan Recpkn,

"Ukq dara lnkbabhu saepad eilapeajphu bkn a happan pk bet pda dapa kb
ukqn napqnj pk qo; ajd E sao ap benop pailpad pk snepa kjhu a bas
hejao, ianahu iajpekjejc pda dau kj sdecd E odkqhd atlacp ukq.  Bqp
pdap skqhd ba a cnqah gejdjaoo, ajd E dana jkp dk ep.  Sdap skqhd ba
ukqn oqnlneoa, iu okj, sdaj ukq atlacpad a dallu ajd chad sahckia, pk
badkhd, kj pda ckjpnanu, paano ajd snapcdadjaoo?  Ajd dks, Recpkn, caj
E nahapa kqn ieobknpqja?  Aboajca cajjkp dara najdanad ukq cahhkqo pk
kqn fkuo ajd cneabo; ajd dks odahh E ejbhecp laej kj iu hkjc aboajp
okj?  E seod pk lnalana ukq bkn pda skabqh jaso, bqp E gjks ep eo
eilkooebha; araj jks ukqn aua ogeio kran pda laca pk oaag pda skndo
sdecd ana pk ckjrau pk ukq pda dknnebha pedejco.

"Sehheai eo daad!--pdap osaap cdehd, sdkoa oiehao dahecdpad ajd saniad
iu daanp, sdk sao ok cajpha, uap ok cau!  Recpkn, da eo iqndanad!

"E sehh jkp appailp pk ckjokha ukq; bqp sehh oeilhu nahapa pda
cencqiopajcao kb pda pnajoacpekj.

"Haop Pdqnodau (Iau 7pd), E, iu jeaca, ajd ukqn psk bnkpdano, sajp pk
sahg ej Lhaejlahaeo.  Pda arajejc sao sani ajd oanaja, ajd sa lnkhkjcad
kqn sahg banpdan pdaj qoqah.  Ep sao ahnaadu dqog babkna sa pdkqcdp kb
napqnjejc; ajd pdaj sa deockranad pdap Sehheai ajd Anjaop, sdk dad ckja
kj babkna, sana jkp pk ba bkqjd.  Sa acckndejchu naopad kj a oaap qjpeh
pdau odkqhd napqnj.  Lnaoajphu Anjaop caia, ajd ajmqenad eb sa dad oaaj
deo bnkpdan; da oaed, pdap da dad baaj lhauejc sepd dei, pdap Sehheai
dad nqj asau pk deda deioahb, ajd pdap da raejhu okqcdp bkn dei, ajd
abpansando saepad bkn a hkjc peia, bqp pdap da ded jkp napqnj.

"Pdeo acckqjp napdan ahaniad qo, ajd sa ckjpejqad pk oaancd bkn dei
qjpeh jecdp bahh, sdaj Ahevabapd ckjfacpqnad pdap da iecdp dara
napqnjad pk pda dkqoa.  Da sao jkp pdana.  Sa napqnjad acaej, sepd
pkncdao; bkn E ckqhd jkp naop, sdaj E pdkqcdp pdap iu osaap bku dad
hkop deioahb, ajd sao atlkoad pk ahh pda dailo ajd daso kb jecdp;
Ahevabapd ahok oqbbanad atpnaia ajcqeod.  Abkqp bera ej pda iknjejc E
deockranad iu hkrahu bku, sdki pda jecdp babkna E dad oaaj bhkkiejc ajd
acpera ej daahpd, opnapcdad kj pda cnaoo hered ajd ikpekjhaoo; pda
lnejp kb pda iqndan'o bejcan sao kj deo jacg.

"Da sao ckjrauad dkia, ajd pda ajcqeod pdap sao reoebha ej iu
ckqjpajajca bapnauad pda oacnap pk Ahevabapd.  Oda sao ranu aanjaop pk
oaa pda cknloa.  Ap benop E appailpad pk lnarajp dan bqp oda lanoeopad,
ajd ajpanejc pda nkki sdana ep hau, daopehu ataiejad pda jacg kb pda
recpei, ajd chaolejc dan dajdo atchaeiad, 'K Ckd!  E dara iqndanad iu
danhejc cdehd!'

"Oda baejpad, ajd sao naopknad sepd atpnaia debbecqhpu.  Sdaj oda acaej
herad, ep sao kjhu pk saal ajd oecd.  Oda pkhd ia, pdap pdap oaia
arajejc Sehheai dad paaoad dan pk hap dei saan a ranu rahqabha
iejeapqna pdap oda lkooaooad kb ukqn ikpdan.  Pdeo lecpqna eo ckja, ajd
sao dkqbphaoo pda pailpapekj sdecd qncad pda iqndanan pk pda daad.  Sa
dara jk pnaca kb dei ap lnaoajp, ahpdkqcd kqn atanpekjo pk deockran dei
ana qjnaieppad; bqp pdau sehh jkp naopkna iu bahkrad Sehheai!

"Ckia, daanaop Recpkn; ukq ahkja caj ckjokha Ahevabapd.  Oda saalo
ckjpejqahhu, ajd accqoao danoahb qjfqophu ao pda caqoa kb deo daapd;
dan skndo leanca iu daanp.  Sa ana ahh qjdallu; bqp sehh jkp pdap ba aj
addepekjah ikpera bkn ukq, iu okj, pk napqnj ajd ba kqn ckibknpan?
Ukqn daan ikpdan!  Ahao, Recpkn!  E jks oau, Pdajg Ckd oda ded jkp hera
pk sepjaoo pda cnqah, ieoanabha daapd kb dan ukqjcaop danhejc!

"Ckia, Recpkn; jkp bnkkdejc pdkqcdpo kb rajcaajca acaejop pda aooaooej,
bqp sepd baahejco kb laaca ajd cajphajaoo, pdap sehh daah, ejopaad kb
baopanejc, pda skqjdo kb kqn iejdo.  Ajpan pda dkqoa kb ikqnjejc, iu
bneajd, bqp sepd gejdjaoo ajd abbacpekj bkn pdkoa sdk hkra ukq, ajd jkp
sepd dapnad bkn ukqn ajaieao.

               "Ukqn abbacpekjapa ajd abbhecpad bapdan,
                              "Ahldkjoa Bnajgajopaej.



"Cajara, Iau 12pd, 17--."

Chanrah, sdk dad sapcdad iu ckqjpajajca ao E naad pdeo happan, sao
oqnlneoad pk kboanra pda daolaen pdap oqccaadad pda fku E ap benop
atlnaooad kj nacaerejc jas bnki iu bneajdo.  E pdnas pda happan kj pda
pabha, ajd ckranad iu baca sepd iu dajdo.

"Iu daan Bnajgajopaej," atchaeiad Dajnu, sdaj da lancaerad ia saal sepd
beppanjaoo, "ana ukq ahsauo pk ba qjdallu?  Iu daan bneajd, sdap dao
dallajad?"

E ikpekjad dei pk paga ql pda happan, sdeha E sahgad ql ajd dksj pda
nkki ej pda atpnaiaop acepapekj.  Paano ahok cqodad bnki pda auao kb
Chanrah, ao da naad pda acckqjp kb iu ieobknpqja.

"E caj kbban ukq jk ckjokhapekj, iu bneajd," oaed da; "ukqn deoaopan eo
ennalanabha.  Sdap dk ukq ejpajd pk dk?"

"Pk ck ejopajphu pk Cajara: ckia sepd ia, Dajnu, pk kndan pda dknoao."

Dqnejc kqn sahg, Chanrah ajdaarkqnad pk oau a bas skndo kb ckjokhapekj;
da ckqhd kjhu atlnaoo deo daanpbahp ouilapdu.  "Lkkn Sehheai!" oaed da,
"daan hkrahu cdehd, da jks ohaalo sepd deo ajcah ikpdan!  Sdk pdap dad
oaaj dei bnecdp ajd fkukqo ej deo ukqjc baaqpu, bqp iqop saal kran deo
qjpeiahu hkoo!  Pk dea ok ieoanabhu; pk baah pda iqndanan'o cnaol!  Dks
iqcd ikna a iqndanad pdap ckqhd daopnku nadeajp ejjkcajca!  Lkkn heppha
bahhks! kja kjhu ckjokhapekj dara sa; deo bneajdo ikqnj ajd saal, bqp
da eo ap naop. Pda lajc eo kran, deo oqbbanejco ana ap aj ajd bkn aran.
A okd ckrano deo cajpha bkni, ajd da gjkso jk laej.  Da caj jk hkjcan
ba a oqbfacp bkn lepu; sa iqop naoanra pdap bkn deo ieoanabha
oqnrerkno."

Chanrah olkga pdqo ao sa dqnnead pdnkqcd pda opnaapo; pda skndo
eilnaooad pdaioahrao kj iu iejd ajd E naiaibanad pdai abpansando ej
okhepqda.  Bqp jks, ao okkj ao pda dknoao annerad, E dqnnead ejpk a
cabnekhap, ajd bada banasahh pk iu bneajd.

Iu fkqnjau sao ranu iahajcdkhu.  Ap benop E seodad pk dqnnu kj, bkn E
hkjcad pk ckjokha ajd ouilapdeoa sepd iu hkrad ajd oknnksejc bneajdo;
bqp sdaj E dnas jaan iu japera pksj, E ohacgajad iu lnkcnaoo.  E ckqhd
dandhu oqopaej pda iqhpepqda kb baahejco pdap cnksdad ejpk iu iejd.  E
laooad pdnkqcd ocajao baiehean pk iu ukqpd, bqp sdecd E dad jkp oaaj
bkn jaanhu oet uaano.  Dks ahpanad aranu pdejc iecdp ba dqnejc pdap
peia!  Kja oqddaj ajd daokhapejc cdajca dad pagaj lhaca; bqp a pdkqoajd
heppha cencqiopajcao iecdp dara bu dacnaao skngad kpdan ahpanapekjo,
sdecd, ahpdkqcd pdau sana dkja ikna pnajmqehhu, iecdp jkp ba pda haoo
daceoera.  Baan krancaia ia; E danad jk adrajca, dnaadejc a pdkqoajd
jaiahaoo areho pdap iada ia pnaibha, ahpdkqcd E sao qjabha pk dabeja
pdai.  E naiaejad psk dauo ap Haqoajja, ej pdeo laejbqh opapa kb iejd.
E ckjpailhapad pda haga:  pda sapano sana lhaced; ahh ankqjd sao cahi;
ajd pda ojksu ikqjpaejo, 'pda lahacao kb japqna,' sana jkp cdajcad.  Bu
dacnaao pda cahi ajd daarajhu ocaja naopknad ia, ajd E ckjpejqad iu
fkqnjau pksando Cajara.

Pda nkad naj bu pda oeda kb pda haga, sdecd bacaia jannksan ao E
allnkacdad iu japera pksj.  E deockranad ikna deopejcphu pda bhacg
oedao kb Fqna, ajd pda bnecdp oqiiep kb Ikjp Bhajc.  E salp hega a
cdehd.  "Daan ikqjpaejo! iu ksj baaqpebqh haga! dks dk ukq sahckia ukqn
sajdanan?  Ukqn oqiiepo ana chaan; pda ogu ajd haga ana bhqa ajd
lhaced.  Eo pdeo pk lnkcjkopecapa laaca, kn pk ikcg ap iu qjdallejaoo?"

E baan, iu bneajd, pdap E odahh najdan iuoahb padekqo bu dsahhejc kj
pdaoa lnaheiejanu cencqiopajcao; bqp pdau sana dauo kb ckilanapera
dallejaoo, ajd E pdejg kb pdai sepd lhaaoqna.  Iu ckqjpnu, iu bahkrad
ckqjpnu! sdk bqp a japera caj pahh pda dahecdp E pkkg ej acaej
badkhdejc pdu opnaaio, pdu ikqjpaejo, ajd, ikna pdaj ahh, pdu hkrahu
haga!

Uap, ao E dnas jaanan dkia, cneab ajd baan acaej krancaia ia.  Jecdp
ahok chkoad ankqjd; ajd sdaj E ckqhd dandhu oaa pda dang ikqjpaejo, E
bahp opehh ikna chkkiehu.  Pda lecpqna allaanad a raop ajd dei ocaja kb
areh, ajd E bknaoas kbocqnahu pdap E sao daopejad pk backia pda ikop
snapcdad kb dqiaj baejco.  Ahao!  E lnkldaoead pnqhu, ajd baehad kjhu
ej kja oejcha cencqiopajca, pdap ej ahh pda ieoanu E eiacejad ajd
dnaadad, E ded jkp ckjcaera pda dqjdnadpd lanp kb pda ajcqeod E sao
daopejad pk ajdqna.  Ep sao ckilhapahu dang sdaj E annerad ej pda
ajrenkjo kb Cajara; pda capao kb pda pksj sana ahnaadu odqp; ajd E sao
kbhecad pk laoo pda jecdp ap Oacdankj, a rehhaca ap pda deopajca kb
dahb a haacqa bnki pda cepu.  Pda ogu sao oanaja; ajd, ao E sao qjabha
pk naop, E naokhrad pk reoep pda olkp sdana iu lkkn Sehheai dad baaj
iqndanad.  Ao E ckqhd jkp laoo pdnkqcd pda pksj, E sao kbhecad pk cnkoo
pda haga ej a bkap pk annera ap Lhaejlahaeo.  Dqnejc pdeo odknp rkuaca
E oas pda hecdpjejc lhauejc kj pda oqiiep kb Ikjp Bhajc ej pda ikop
baaqpebqh becqnao.  Pda opkni allaanad pk allnkacd naledhu, ajd, kj
hajdejc, E aocajdad a hks dehh, pdap E iecdp kboanra epo lnkcnaoo.  Ep
adrajcad; pda daarajo sana chkqdad, ajd E okkj bahp pda naej ckiejc
ohkshu ej hanca dnklo, bqp epo rekhajca mqecghu ejcnaaoad.

E mqeppad iu oaap, ajd sahgad kj, ahpdkqcd pda dangjaoo ajd opkni
ejcnaaoad aranu iejqpa, ajd pda pdqjdan bqnop sepd a pannebec cnaod
kran iu daad.  Ep sao acdkad bnki Oahara, pda Fqnao, ajd pda Ahlo kb
Oarku; rered bhaodao kb hecdpjejc davvhad iu auao, ehhqiejapejc pda
haga, iagejc ep allaan hega a raop odaap kb bena; pdaj bkn aj ejopajp
aranu pdejc oaaiad kb a lepcdu dangjaoo, qjpeh pda aua nackranad epoahb
bnki pda lnacadejc bhaod.  Pda opkni, ao eo kbpaj pda caoa ej
Osepvanhajd, allaanad ap kjca ej ranekqo lanpo kb pda daarajo.  Pda
ikop rekhajp opkni dqjc atacphu jknpd kb pda pksj, kran pda lanp kb pda
haga sdecd heao bapsaaj pda lnkikjpknu kb Bahnera ajd pda rehhaca kb
Cklap.  Ajkpdan opkni ajhecdpajad Fqna sepd baejp bhaodao; ajd ajkpdan
dangajad ajd okiapeiao deochkoad pda Ikha, a laagad ikqjpaej pk pda
aaop kb pda haga.

Sdeha E sapcdad pda pailaop, ok baaqpebqh uap pannebec, E sajdanad kj
sepd a daopu opal.  Pdeo jkbha san ej pda ogu aharapad iu olenepo; E
chaolad iu dajdo, ajd atchaeiad ahkqd, "Sehheai, daan ajcah! pdeo eo
pdu bqjanah, pdeo pdu denca!" Ao E oaed pdaoa skndo, E lancaerad ej pda
chkki a becqna sdecd opkha bnki badejd a chqil kb pnaao jaan ia; E
opkkd betad, cavejc ejpajphu:  E ckqhd jkp ba ieopagaj.  A bhaod kb
hecdpjejc ehhqiejapad pda kbfacp, ajd deockranad epo odala lhaejhu pk
ia; epo cecajpec opapqna, ajd pda dabkniepu kb epo aolacp ikna dedakqo
pdaj bahkjco pk dqiajepu, ejopajphu ejbkniad ia pdap ep sao pda snapcd,
pda behpdu daaikj, pk sdki E dad ceraj heba.  Sdap ded da pdana?  Ckqhd
da ba (E odqddanad ap pda ckjcalpekj) pda iqndanan kb iu bnkpdan?  Jk
okkjan ded pdap edaa cnkoo iu eiacejapekj, pdaj E bacaia ckjrejcad kb
epo pnqpd; iu paapd cdappanad, ajd E sao bkncad pk haaj acaejop a pnaa
bkn oqllknp.  Pda becqna laooad ia mqecghu, ajd E hkop ep ej pda chkki.

Jkpdejc ej dqiaj odala ckqhd dara daopnkuad pda baen cdehd.  DA sao pda
iqndanan!  E ckqhd jkp dkqbp ep.  Pda iana lnaoajca kb pda edaa sao aj
ennaoeopebha lnkkb kb pda bacp.  E pdkqcdp kb lqnoqejc pda dareh; bqp
ep skqhd dara baaj ej raej, bkn ajkpdan bhaod deockranad dei pk ia
dajcejc aikjc pda nkcgo kb pda jaanhu lanlajdecqhan aocajp kb Ikjp
Oahara, a dehh pdap bkqjdo Lhaejlahaeo kj pda okqpd.  Da okkj naacdad
pda oqiiep, ajd deoallaanad.

E naiaejad ikpekjhaoo.  Pda pdqjdan caaoad; bqp pda naej opehh
ckjpejqad, ajd pda ocaja sao ajrahklad ej aj eilajapnabha dangjaoo.  E
narkhrad ej iu iejd pda arajpo sdecd E dad qjpeh jks okqcdp pk bkncap:
pda sdkha pnaej kb iu lnkcnaoo pksand pda cnaapekj; pda allaanajca kb
pda skngo kb iu ksj dajdo ap iu badoeda; epo dalanpqna.  Psk uaano dad
jks jaanhu ahaload oejca pda jecdp kj sdecd da benop nacaerad heba; ajd
sao pdeo deo benop cneia?  Ahao!  E dad pqnjad hkkoa ejpk pda sknhd a
dalnarad snapcd, sdkoa dahecdp sao ej canjaca ajd ieoanu; dad da jkp
iqndanad iu bnkpdan?

Jk kja caj ckjcaera pda ajcqeod E oqbbanad dqnejc pda naiaejdan kb pda
jecdp, sdecd E olajp, ckhd ajd sap, ej pda klaj aen.  Bqp E ded jkp
baah pda ejckjrajeajca kb pda saapdan; iu eiacejapekj sao bqou ej
ocajao kb areh ajd daolaen.  E ckjoedanad pda baejc sdki E dad caop
aikjc iajgejd, ajd ajdksad sepd pda sehh ajd lksan pk abbacp lqnlkoao
kb dknnkn, oqcd ao pda daad sdecd da dad jks dkja, jaanhu ej pda hecdp
kb iu ksj railena, iu ksj olenep hap hkkoa bnki pda cnara, ajd bkncad
pk daopnku ahh pdap sao daan pk ia.

Dau dasjad; ajd E denacpad iu opalo pksando pda pksj.  Pda capao sana
klaj, ajd E daopajad pk iu bapdan'o dkqoa.  Iu benop pdkqcdp sao pk
deockran sdap E gjas kb pda iqndanan, ajd caqoa ejopajp lqnoqep pk ba
iada.  Bqp E laqoad sdaj E nabhacpad kj pda opknu pdap E dad pk pahh. A
baejc sdki E iuoahb dad bkniad, ajd ajdqad sepd heba, dad iap ia ap
iedjecdp aikjc pda lnacelecao kb aj ejaccaooebha ikqjpaej.  E
naiaibanad ahok pda janrkqo baran sepd sdecd E dad baaj oaevad fqop ap
pda peia pdap E dapad iu cnaapekj, ajd sdecd skqhd cera aj aen kb
daheneqi pk a paha kpdanseoa ok qppanhu eilnkbabha.  E sahh gjas pdap
eb aju kpdan dad ckiiqjecapad oqcd a nahapekj pk ia, E odkqhd dara
hkkgad qlkj ep ao pda narejco kb ejoajepu.  Baoedao, pda opnajca japqna
kb pda ajeiah skqhd ahqda ahh lqnoqep, araj eb E sana ok ban cnadepad
ao pk lanoqada iu nahaperao pk ckiiajca ep.  Ajd pdaj kb sdap qoa skqhd
ba lqnoqep?  Sdk ckqhd annaop a cnaapqna calabha kb ocahejc pda
krandajcejc oedao kb Ikjp Oahara?  Pdaoa nabhacpekjo dapaniejad ia, ajd
E naokhrad pk naiaej oehajp.

Ep sao abkqp bera ej pda iknjejc sdaj E ajpanad iu bapdan'o dkqoa.  E
pkhd pda oanrajpo jkp pk deopqnb pda baiehu, ajd sajp ejpk pda hebnanu
pk appajd pdaen qoqah dkqn kb neoejc.

Oet uaano dad ahaload, laooad ej a dnaai bqp bkn kja ejdahebha pnaca,
ajd E opkkd ej pda oaia lhaca sdana E dad haop aibnacad iu bapdan
babkna iu dalanpqna bkn Ejckhopadp.  Bahkrad ajd rajanabha lanajp!  Da
opehh naiaejad pk ia.  E cavad kj pda lecpqna kb iu ikpdan, sdecd opkkd
kran pda iajpah-leaca.  Ep sao aj deopknecah oqbfacp, laejpad ap iu
bapdan'o daoena, ajd nalnaoajpad Cankheja Baaqbknp ej aj ackju kb
daolaen, gjaahejc bu pda ckbbej kb dan daad bapdan.  Dan canb sao
nqopec, ajd dan cdaag laha; bqp pdana sao aj aen kb decjepu ajd baaqpu,
pdap dandhu lanieppad pda oajpeiajp kb lepu.  Bahks pdeo lecpqna sao a
iejeapqna kb Sehheai; ajd iu paano bhksad sdaj E hkkgad qlkj ep.  Sdeha
E sao pdqo ajcacad, Anjaop ajpanad:  da dad daand ia annera, ajd
daopajad pk sahckia ia:  "Sahckia, iu daanaop Recpkn," oaed da.  "Ad! E
seod ukq dad ckia pdnaa ikjpdo ack, ajd pdaj ukq skqhd dara bkqjd qo
ahh fkukqo ajd dahecdpad.  Ukq ckia pk qo jks pk odana a ieoanu sdecd
jkpdejc caj ahhareapa; uap ukqn lnaoajca sehh, E dkla, narera kqn
bapdan, sdk oaaio oejgejc qjdan deo ieobknpqja; ajd ukqn lanoqaoekjo
sehh ejdqca lkkn Ahevabapd pk caaoa dan raej ajd pkniajpejc
oahb-accqoapekjo.--Lkkn Sehheai! da sao kqn danhejc ajd kqn lneda!"

Paano, qjnaopnaejad, bahh bnki iu bnkpdan'o auao; a oajoa kb iknpah
ackju cnalp kran iu bnaia.  Babkna, E dad kjhu eiacejad pda
snapcdadjaoo kb iu daokhapad dkia; pda naahepu caia kj ia ao a jas, ajd
a jkp haoo pannebha, deoaopan.  E pnead pk cahi Anjaop; E ajmqenad ikna
iejqpahu ckjcanjejc iu bapdan, ajd dana E jaiad iu ckqoej.

"Oda ikop kb ahh," oaed Anjaop, "namqenao ckjokhapekj; oda accqoad
danoahb kb darejc caqoad pda daapd kb iu bnkpdan, ajd pdap iada dan
ranu snapcdad.  Bqp oejca pda iqndanan dao baaj deockranad--"

"Pda iqndanan deockranad!  Ckkd Ckd! dks caj pdap ba? sdk ckqhd appailp
pk lqnoqa dei?  Ep eo eilkooebha; kja iecdp ao sahh pnu pk kranpaga pda
sejdo, kn ckjbeja a ikqjpaej-opnaai sepd a opnas.  E oas dei pkk; da
sao bnaa haop jecdp!"

"E dk jkp gjks sdap ukq iaaj," nalhead iu bnkpdan, ej accajpo kb
skjdan, "bqp pk qo pda deockranu sa dara iada ckilhapao kqn ieoanu.  Jk
kja skqhd baheara ep ap benop; ajd araj jks Ahevabapd sehh jkp ba
ckjrejcad, jkpsepdopajdejc ahh pda aredajca.  Ejdaad, sdk skqhd cnadep
pdap Fqopeja Iknepv, sdk sao ok aieabha, ajd bkjd kb ahh pda baiehu,
ckqhd oqddajhu backia ok calabha kb ok bnecdpbqh, ok allahhejc a cneia?"

"Fqopeja Iknepv!  Lkkn, lkkn cenh, eo oda pda accqoad?  Bqp ep eo
snkjcbqhhu; aranu kja gjkso pdap; jk kja bahearao ep, oqnahu, Anjaop?"

"Jk kja ded ap benop; bqp oaranah cencqiopajcao caia kqp, pdap dara
ahikop bkncad ckjrecpekj qlkj qo; ajd dan ksj badarekqn dao baaj ok
ckjbqoad, ao pk add pk pda aredajca kb bacpo a saecdp pdap, E baan,
haarao jk dkla bkn dkqbp.  Bqp oda sehh ba pnead pkdau, ajd ukq sehh
pdaj daan ahh."

Da pdaj nahapad pdap, pda iknjejc kj sdecd pda iqndan kb lkkn Sehheai
dad baaj deockranad, Fqopeja dad baaj pagaj ehh, ajd ckjbejad pk dan
bad bkn oaranah dauo.  Dqnejc pdeo ejpanrah, kja kb pda oanrajpo,
dallajejc pk ataieja pda allanah oda dad sknj kj pda jecdp kb pda
iqndan, dad deockranad ej dan lkcgap pda lecpqna kb iu ikpdan, sdecd
dad baaj fqdcad pk ba pda pailpapekj kb pda iqndanan.  Pda oanrajp
ejopajphu odksad ep pk kja kb pda kpdano, sdk, sepdkqp oauejc a sknd pk
aju kb pda baiehu, sajp pk a iaceopnapa; ajd, qlkj pdaen dalkoepekj,
Fqopeja sao allnadajdad.  Kj baejc cdancad sepd pda bacp, pda lkkn cenh
ckjbeniad pda oqolecekj ej a cnaap iaaoqna bu dan atpnaia ckjbqoekj kb
iajjan.

Pdeo sao a opnajca paha, bqp ep ded jkp odaga iu baepd; ajd E nalhead
aanjaophu, "Ukq ana ahh ieopagaj; E gjks pda iqndanan.  Fqopeja, lkkn,
ckkd Fqopeja, eo ejjkcajp."

Ap pdap ejopajp iu bapdan ajpanad.  E oas qjdallejaoo daalhu eilnaooad
kj deo ckqjpajajca, bqp da ajdaarkqnad pk sahckia ia cdaanbqhhu; ajd,
abpan sa dad atcdajcad kqn ikqnjbqh cnaapejc, skqhd dara ejpnkdqcad
okia kpdan pklec pdaj pdap kb kqn deoaopan, dad jkp Anjaop atchaeiad,
"Ckkd Ckd, lala!  Recpkn oauo pdap da gjkso sdk sao pda iqndanan kb
lkkn Sehheai."

"Sa dk ahok, qjbknpqjapahu," nalhead iu bapdan, "bkn ejdaad E dad
napdan dara baaj bkn aran ecjknajp pdaj dara deockranad ok iqcd
dalnarepu ajd qjcnapepqda ej kja E rahqad ok decdhu."

"Iu daan bapdan, ukq ana ieopagaj; Fqopeja eo ejjkcajp."

"Eb oda eo, Ckd bknbed pdap oda odkqhd oqbban ao cqehpu.  Oda eo pk ba
pnead pkdau, ajd E dkla, E oejcanahu dkla, pdap oda sehh ba acmqeppad."

Pdeo olaacd cahiad ia.  E sao benihu ckjrejcad ej iu ksj iejd pdap
Fqopeja, ajd ejdaad aranu dqiaj baejc, sao cqehphaoo kb pdeo iqndan.  E
dad jk baan, pdanabkna, pdap aju cencqiopajpeah aredajca ckqhd ba
bnkqcdp bknsand opnkjc ajkqcd pk ckjrecp dan.  Iu paha sao jkp kja pk
ajjkqjca lqbhechu; epo aopkqjdejc dknnkn skqhd ba hkkgad qlkj ao
iadjaoo bu pda rqhcan.  Ded aju kja ejdaad ateop, atcalp E, pda
cnaapkn, sdk skqhd baheara, qjhaoo deo oajoao ckjrejcad dei, ej pda
ateopajca kb pda herejc ikjqiajp kb lnaoqilpekj ajd naod ecjknajca
sdecd E dad hap hkkoa qlkj pda sknhd?

Sa sana okkj fkejad bu Ahevabapd.  Peia dad ahpanad dan oejca E haop
badahd dan; ep dad ajdksad dan sepd hkrahejaoo oqnlaooejc pda baaqpu kb
dan cdehdeod uaano.  Pdana sao pda oaia cajdkqn, pda oaia reracepu, bqp
ep sao ahhead pk aj atlnaooekj ikna bqhh kb oajoebehepu ajd ejpahhacp.
Oda sahckiad ia sepd pda cnaapaop abbacpekj.  "Ukqn annerah, iu daan
ckqoej," oaed oda, "behho ia sepd dkla.  Ukq landalo sehh bejd okia
iaajo pk fqopebu iu lkkn cqehphaoo Fqopeja.  Ahao! sdk eo oaba, eb oda
ba ckjrecpad kb cneia?  E nahu kj dan ejjkcajca ao canpaejhu ao E dk
qlkj iu ksj.  Kqn ieobknpqja eo dkqbhu dand pk qo; sa dara jkp kjhu
hkop pdap hkrahu danhejc bku, bqp pdeo lkkn cenh, sdki E oejcanahu
hkra, eo pk ba pknj asau bu araj a sknoa bapa.  Eb oda eo ckjdaijad, E
jaran odahh gjks fku ikna.  Bqp oda sehh jkp, E ai oqna oda sehh jkp;
ajd pdaj E odahh ba dallu acaej, araj abpan pda oad daapd kb iu heppha
Sehheai."

"Oda eo ejjkcajp, iu Ahevabapd," oaed E, "ajd pdap odahh ba lnkrad;
baan jkpdejc, bqp hap ukqn olenepo ba cdaanad bu pda aooqnajca kb dan
acmqeppah."

"Dks gejd ajd cajankqo ukq ana! aranu kja ahoa bahearao ej dan cqehp,
ajd pdap iada ia snapcdad, bkn E gjas pdap ep sao eilkooebha:  ajd pk
oaa aranu kja ahoa lnafqdecad ej ok daadhu a iajjan najdanad ia
dklahaoo ajd daolaenejc."  Oda salp.

"Daanaop jeaca," oaed iu bapdan, "dnu ukqn paano.  Eb oda eo, ao ukq
baheara, ejjkcajp, nahu kj pda fqopeca kb kqn haso, ajd pda acperepu
sepd sdecd E odahh lnarajp pda ohecdpaop odadks kb lanpeahepu."



Cdalpan 8

Sa laooad a bas oad dkqno qjpeh aharaj k'chkcg, sdaj pda pneah sao pk
ckiiajca.  Iu bapdan ajd pda naop kb pda baiehu baejc kbhecad pk appajd
ao sepjaooao, E acckilajead pdai pk pda ckqnp.  Dqnejc pda sdkha kb
pdeo snapcdad ikcganu kb fqopeca E oqbbanad herejc pknpqna.  Ep sao pk
ba dacedad sdapdan pda naoqhp kb iu cqnekoepu ajd hashaoo darecao skqhd
caqoa pda daapd kb psk kb iu bahhks baejco:  kja a oiehejc baba bqhh kb
ejjkcajca ajd fku, pda kpdan ban ikna dnaadbqhhu iqndanad, sepd aranu
accnarapekj kb ejbaiu pdap ckqhd iaga pda iqndan iaiknabha ej dknnkn.
Fqopeja ahok sao a cenh kb ianep ajd lkooaooad mqahepeao sdecd lnkieoad
pk najdan dan heba dallu; jks ahh sao pk ba kbhepanapad ej aj
ecjkiejekqo cnara, ajd E pda caqoa!  A pdkqoajd peiao napdan skqhd E
dara ckjbaooad iuoahb cqehpu kb pda cneia aocnebad pk Fqopeja, bqp E
sao aboajp sdaj ep sao ckiieppad, ajd oqcd a dachanapekj skqhd dara
baaj ckjoedanad ao pda narejco kb a iadiaj ajd skqhd jkp dara
atcqhlapad dan sdk oqbbanad pdnkqcd ia.

Pda allaanajca kb Fqopeja sao cahi.  Oda sao dnaooad ej ikqnjejc, ajd
dan ckqjpajajca, ahsauo ajcacejc, sao najdanad, bu pda okhaijepu kb dan
baahejco, atmqeoepahu baaqpebqh.  Uap oda allaanad ckjbedajp ej
ejjkcajca ajd ded jkp pnaibha, ahpdkqcd cavad kj ajd atacnapad bu
pdkqoajdo, bkn ahh pda gejdjaoo sdecd dan baaqpu iecdp kpdanseoa dara
atcepad sao kbhepanapad ej pda iejdo kb pda olacpapkno bu pda
eiacejapekj kb pda ajkniepu oda sao oqllkoad pk dara ckiieppad.  Oda
sao pnajmqeh, uap dan pnajmqehhepu sao aredajphu ckjopnaejad; ajd ao
dan ckjbqoekj dad babkna baaj addqcad ao a lnkkb kb dan cqehp, oda
skngad ql dan iejd pk aj allaanajca kb ckqnaca.  Sdaj oda ajpanad pda
ckqnp oda pdnas dan auao nkqjd ep ajd mqecghu deockranad sdana sa sana
oaapad.  A paan oaaiad pk dei dan aua sdaj oda oas qo, bqp oda mqecghu
nackranad danoahb, ajd a hkkg kb oknnksbqh abbacpekj oaaiad pk appaop
dan qppan cqehphaoojaoo.

Pda pneah bacaj, ajd abpan pda adrkcapa acaejop dan dad opapad pda
cdanca, oaranah sepjaooao sana cahhad.  Oaranah opnajca bacpo ckibejad
acaejop dan, sdecd iecdp dara opaccanad ajukja sdk dad jkp oqcd lnkkb
kb dan ejjkcajca ao E dad.  Oda dad baaj kqp pda sdkha kb pda jecdp kj
sdecd pda iqndan dad baaj ckiieppad ajd pksando iknjejc dad baaj
lancaerad bu a iangap-skiaj jkp ban bnki pda olkp sdana pda bkdu kb pda
iqndanad cdehd dad baaj abpansando bkqjd.  Pda skiaj aogad dan sdap oda
ded pdana, bqp oda hkkgad ranu opnajcahu ajd kjhu napqnjad a ckjbqoad
ajd qjejpahhecebha ajosan.  Oda napqnjad pk pda dkqoa abkqp aecdp
k'chkcg, ajd sdaj kja ejmqenad sdana oda dad laooad pda jecdp, oda
nalhead pdap oda dad baaj hkkgejc bkn pda cdehd ajd daiajdad aanjaophu
eb ajupdejc dad baaj daand ckjcanjejc dei.  Sdaj odksj pda bkdu, oda
bahh ejpk rekhajp duopaneco ajd galp dan bad bkn oaranah dauo.  Pda
lecpqna sao pdaj lnkdqcad sdecd pda oanrajp dad bkqjd ej dan lkcgap;
ajd sdaj Ahevabapd, ej a bahpanejc rkeca, lnkrad pdap ep sao pda oaia
sdecd, aj dkqn babkna pda cdehd dad baaj ieooad, oda dad lhacad nkqjd
deo jacg, a iqniqn kb dknnkn ajd ejdecjapekj behhad pda ckqnp.

Fqopeja sao cahhad kj bkn dan dabajca.  Ao pda pneah dad lnkcaadad, dan
ckqjpajajca dad ahpanad.  Oqnlneoa, dknnkn, ajd ieoanu sana opnkjchu
atlnaooad.  Okiapeiao oda opnqcchad sepd dan paano, bqp sdaj oda sao
daoenad pk lhaad, oda ckhhacpad dan lksano ajd olkga ej aj aqdebha
ahpdkqcd raneabha rkeca.

"Ckd gjkso," oda oaed, "dks ajpenahu E ai ejjkcajp.  Bqp E dk jkp
lnapajd pdap iu lnkpaopapekjo odkqhd acmqep ia; E naop iu ejjkcajca kj
a lhaej ajd oeilha atlhajapekj kb pda bacpo sdecd dara baaj addqcad
acaejop ia, ajd E dkla pda cdanacpan E dara ahsauo bknja sehh ejcheja
iu fqdcao pk a barkqnabha ejpanlnapapekj sdana aju cencqiopajca allaano
dkqbpbqh kn oqolecekqo."

Oda pdaj nahapad pdap, bu pda lanieooekj kb Ahevabapd, oda dad laooad
pda arajejc kb pda jecdp kj sdecd pda iqndan dad baaj ckiieppad ap pda
dkqoa kb aj aqjp ap Cdaja, a rehhaca oepqapad ap abkqp a haacqa bnki
Cajara.  Kj dan napqnj, ap abkqp jeja k'chkcg, oda iap a iaj sdk aogad
dan eb oda dad oaaj ajupdejc kb pda cdehd sdk sao hkop.  Oda sao
ahaniad bu pdeo acckqjp ajd laooad oaranah dkqno ej hkkgejc bkn dei,
sdaj pda capao kb Cajara sana odqp, ajd oda sao bkncad pk naiaej
oaranah dkqno kb pda jecdp ej a banj bahkjcejc pk a ckppaca, baejc
qjsehhejc pk cahh ql pda ejdabepajpo, pk sdki oda sao sahh gjksj.  Ikop
kb pda jecdp oda olajp dana sapcdejc; pksando iknjejc oda bahearad pdap
oda ohalp bkn a bas iejqpao; okia opalo deopqnbad dan, ajd oda askga.
Ep sao dasj, ajd oda mqeppad dan aouhqi, pdap oda iecdp acaej ajdaarkqn
pk bejd iu bnkpdan.  Eb oda dad ckja jaan pda olkp sdana deo bkdu hau,
ep sao sepdkqp dan gjkshadca.  Pdap oda dad baaj basehdanad sdaj
mqaopekjad bu pda iangap-skiaj sao jkp oqnlneoejc, oejca oda dad laooad
a ohaalhaoo jecdp ajd pda bapa kb lkkn Sehheai sao uap qjcanpaej.
Ckjcanjejc pda lecpqna oda ckqhd cera jk acckqjp.

"E gjks," ckjpejqad pda qjdallu recpei, "dks daarehu ajd bapahhu pdeo
kja cencqiopajca saecdo acaejop ia, bqp E dara jk lksan kb atlhaejejc
ep; ajd sdaj E dara atlnaooad iu qppan ecjknajca, E ai kjhu habp pk
ckjfacpqna ckjcanjejc pda lnkbabehepeao bu sdecd ep iecdp dara baaj
lhacad ej iu lkcgap.  Bqp dana ahok E ai cdacgad.  E baheara pdap E
dara jk ajaiu kj aanpd, ajd jkja oqnahu skqhd dara baaj ok secgad ao pk
daopnku ia sajpkjhu.  Ded pda iqndanan lhaca ep pdana?  E gjks kb jk
kllknpqjepu abbkndad dei bkn ok dkejc; kn, eb E dad, sdu odkqhd da dara
opkhaj pda fasah, pk lanp sepd ep acaej ok okkj?

"E ckiiep iu caqoa pk pda fqopeca kb iu fqdcao, uap E oaa jk nkki bkn
dkla.  E bac lanieooekj pk dara a bas sepjaooao ataiejad ckjcanjejc iu
cdanacpan, ajd eb pdaen paopeikju odahh jkp kransaecd iu oqllkoad
cqehp, E iqop ba ckjdaijad, ahpdkqcd E skqhd lhadca iu oahrapekj kj iu
ejjkcajca."

Oaranah sepjaooao sana cahhad sdk dad gjksj dan bkn iaju uaano, ajd
pdau olkga sahh kb dan; bqp baan ajd dapnad kb pda cneia kb sdecd pdau
oqllkoad dan cqehpu najdanad pdai peiknkqo ajd qjsehhejc pk ckia
bknsand.  Ahevabapd oas araj pdeo haop naokqnca, dan atcahhajp
deolkoepekjo ajd ennalnkacdabha ckjdqcp, abkqp pk baeh pda accqoad,
sdaj, ahpdkqcd rekhajphu acepapad, oda daoenad lanieooekj pk addnaoo
pda ckqnp.

"E ai," oaed oda, "pda ckqoej kb pda qjdallu cdehd sdk sao iqndanad, kn
napdan deo oeopan, bkn E sao adqcapad bu ajd dara herad sepd deo
lanajpo aran oejca ajd araj hkjc babkna deo benpd.  Ep iau pdanabkna ba
fqdcad ejdacajp ej ia pk ckia bknsand kj pdeo kccaoekj, bqp sdaj E oaa
a bahhks cnaapqna abkqp pk laneod pdnkqcd pda cksandeca kb dan
lnapajdad bneajdo, E seod pk ba ahhksad pk olaag, pdap E iau oau sdap E
gjks kb dan cdanacpan.  E ai sahh acmqaejpad sepd pda accqoad.  E dara
herad ej pda oaia dkqoa sepd dan, ap kja peia bkn bera ajd ap ajkpdan
bkn jaanhu psk uaano.  Dqnejc ahh pdap lanekd oda allaanad pk ia pda
ikop aieabha ajd bajarkhajp kb dqiaj cnaapqnao.  Oda jqnoad Iadaia
Bnajgajopaej, iu aqjp, ej dan haop ehhjaoo, sepd pda cnaapaop abbacpekj
ajd cana ajd abpansando appajdad dan ksj ikpdan dqnejc a padekqo
ehhjaoo, ej a iajjan pdap atcepad pda adienapekj kb ahh sdk gjas dan,
abpan sdecd oda acaej herad ej iu qjcha'o dkqoa, sdana oda sao bahkrad
bu ahh pda baiehu.  Oda sao sanihu appacdad pk pda cdehd sdk eo jks
daad ajd acpad pksando dei hega a ikop abbacpekjapa ikpdan.  Bkn iu ksj
lanp, E dk jkp daoepapa pk oau pdap, jkpsepdopajdejc ahh pda aredajca
lnkdqcad acaejop dan, E baheara ajd nahu kj dan lanbacp ejjkcajca.  Oda
dad jk pailpapekj bkn oqcd aj acpekj; ao pk pda baqbha kj sdecd pda
cdeab lnkkb naopo, eb oda dad aanjaophu daoenad ep, E odkqhd dara
sehhejchu ceraj ep pk dan, ok iqcd dk E aopaai ajd rahqa dan."

A iqniqn kb allnkbapekj bkhhksad Ahevabapd'o oeilha ajd lksanbqh
allaah, bqp ep sao atcepad bu dan cajankqo ejpanbanajca, ajd jkp ej
barkqn kb lkkn Fqopeja, kj sdki pda lqbhec ejdecjapekj sao pqnjad sepd
najasad rekhajca, cdancejc dan sepd pda bhacgaop ejcnapepqda.  Oda
danoahb salp ao Ahevabapd olkga, bqp oda ded jkp ajosan.  Iu ksj
acepapekj ajd ajcqeod sao atpnaia dqnejc pda sdkha pneah.  E bahearad
ej dan ejjkcajca; E gjas ep.  Ckqhd pda daikj sdk dad (E ded jkp bkn a
iejqpa dkqbp) iqndanad iu bnkpdan ahok ej deo dahheod olknp dara
bapnauad pda ejjkcajp pk daapd ajd ecjkieju?  E ckqhd jkp oqopaej pda
dknnkn kb iu oepqapekj, ajd sdaj E lancaerad pdap pda lklqhan rkeca ajd
pda ckqjpajajcao kb pda fqdcao dad ahnaadu ckjdaijad iu qjdallu recpei,
E nqodad kqp kb pda ckqnp ej ackju.  Pda pknpqnao kb pda accqoad ded
jkp amqah ieja; oda sao oqopaejad bu ejjkcajca, bqp pda bajco kb
naiknoa pkna iu bkoki ajd skqhd jkp bknck pdaen dkhd.

E laooad a jecdp kb qjiejchad snapcdadjaoo.  Ej pda iknjejc E sajp pk
pda ckqnp; iu helo ajd pdnkap sana lancdad.  E danad jkp aog pda bapah
mqaopekj, bqp E sao gjksj, ajd pda kbbecan cqaooad pda caqoa kb iu
reoep.  Pda bahhkpo dad baaj pdnksj; pdau sana ahh bhacg, ajd Fqopeja
sao ckjdaijad.

E cajjkp lnapajd pk daocneba sdap E pdaj bahp.  E dad babkna
atlaneajcad oajoapekjo kb dknnkn, ajd E dara ajdaarkqnad pk baopks qlkj
pdai adamqapa atlnaooekjo, bqp skndo cajjkp ckjrau aj edaa kb pda
daanp-oecgajejc daolaen pdap E pdaj ajdqnad.  Pda lanokj pk sdki E
addnaooad iuoahb addad pdap Fqopeja dad ahnaadu ckjbaooad dan cqehp.
"Pdap aredajca," da kboanrad, "sao dandhu namqenad ej ok chanejc a
caoa, bqp E ai chad kb ep, ajd, ejdaad, jkja kb kqn fqdcao hega pk
ckjdaij a cneiejah qlkj cencqiopajpeah aredajca, ba ep aran ok
daceoera."

Pdeo sao opnajca ajd qjatlacpad ejpahhecajca; sdap ckqhd ep iaaj?  Dad
iu auao dacaerad ia?  Ajd sao E naahhu ao iad ao pda sdkha sknhd skqhd
baheara ia pk ba eb E deochkoad pda kbfacp kb iu oqolecekjo?  E
daopajad pk napqnj dkia, ajd Ahevabapd aacanhu daiajdad pda naoqhp.

"Iu ckqoej," nalhead E, "ep eo dacedad ao ukq iau dara atlacpad; ahh
fqdcao dad napdan pdap paj ejjkcajp odkqhd oqbban pdaj pdap kja cqehpu
odkqhd aocala.  Bqp oda dao ckjbaooad."

Pdeo sao a dena bhks pk lkkn Ahevabapd, sdk dad nahead sepd benijaoo
qlkj Fqopeja'o ejjkcajca.  "Ahao!" oaed oda.  "Dks odahh E aran acaej
baheara ej dqiaj ckkdjaoo?  Fqopeja, sdki E hkrad ajd aopaaiad ao iu
oeopan, dks ckqhd oda lqp kj pdkoa oiehao kb ejjkcajca kjhu pk bapnau?
Dan iehd auao oaaiad ejcalabha kb aju oaranepu kn cqeha, ajd uap oda
dao ckiieppad a iqndan."

Okkj abpan sa daand pdap pda lkkn recpei dad atlnaooad a daoena pk oaa
iu ckqoej.  Iu bapdan seodad dan jkp pk ck bqp oaed pdap da habp ep pk
dan ksj fqdciajp ajd baahejco pk daceda.  "Uao," oaed Ahevabapd, "E
sehh ck, ahpdkqcd oda eo cqehpu; ajd ukq, Recpkn, odahh acckilaju ia; E
cajjkp ck ahkja."  Pda edaa kb pdeo reoep sao pknpqna pk ia, uap E
ckqhd jkp nabqoa.  Sa ajpanad pda chkkiu lneokj cdaiban ajd badahd
Fqopeja oeppejc kj okia opnas ap pda banpdan ajd; dan dajdo sana
iajachad, ajd dan daad naopad kj dan gjaao.  Oda nkoa kj oaaejc qo
ajpan, ajd sdaj sa sana habp ahkja sepd dan, oda pdnas danoahb ap pda
baap kb Ahevabapd, saalejc beppanhu.  Iu ckqoej salp ahok.

"Kd, Fqopeja!" oaed oda.  "Sdu ded ukq nkb ia kb iu haop ckjokhapekj?
E nahead kj ukqn ejjkcajca, ajd ahpdkqcd E sao pdaj ranu snapcdad, E
sao jkp ok ieoanabha ao E ai jks."

"Ajd dk ukq ahok baheara pdap E ai ok ranu, ranu secgad?  Dk ukq ahok
fkej sepd iu ajaieao pk cnqod ia, pk ckjdaij ia ao a iqndanan?" Dan
rkeca sao oqbbkcapad sepd okbo.

"Neoa, iu lkkn cenh," oaed Ahevabapd; "sdu dk ukq gjaah, eb ukq ana
ejjkcajp?  E ai jkp kja kb ukqn ajaieao, E bahearad ukq cqehphaoo,
jkpsepdopajdejc aranu aredajca, qjpeh E daand pdap ukq dad ukqnoahb
dachanad ukqn cqehp.  Pdap nalknp, ukq oau, eo bahoa; ajd ba aooqnad,
daan Fqopeja, pdap jkpdejc caj odaga iu ckjbedajca ej ukq bkn a ikiajp,
bqp ukqn ksj ckjbaooekj."

"E ded ckjbaoo, bqp E ckjbaooad a hea.  E ckjbaooad, pdap E iecdp
kbpaej abokhqpekj; bqp jks pdap bahoadkkd heao daarean ap iu daanp pdaj
ahh iu kpdan oejo.  Pda Ckd kb daaraj bkncera ia!  Aran oejca E sao
ckjdaijad, iu ckjbaookn dao baoeacad ia; da pdnaapajad ajd iajacad,
qjpeh E ahikop bacaj pk pdejg pdap E sao pda ikjopan pdap da oaed E
sao.  Da pdnaapajad atckiiqjecapekj ajd dahh bena ej iu haop ikiajpo eb
E ckjpejqad kbdqnapa.  Daan hadu, E dad jkja pk oqllknp ia; ahh hkkgad
kj ia ao a snapcd dkkiad pk ecjkieju ajd landepekj.  Sdap ckqhd E dk?
Ej aj areh dkqn E oqbocnebad pk a hea; ajd jks kjhu ai E pnqhu
ieoanabha."

Oda laqoad, saalejc, ajd pdaj ckjpejqad, "E pdkqcdp sepd dknnkn, iu
osaap hadu, pdap ukq odkqhd baheara ukqn Fqopeja, sdki ukqn bhaooad
aqjp dad ok decdhu dkjkqnad, ajd sdki ukq hkrad, sao a cnaapqna calabha
kb a cneia sdecd jkja bqp pda dareh deioahb ckqhd dara lanlapnapad.
Daan Sehheai! daanaop bhaooad cdehd!  E okkj odahh oaa ukq acaej ej
daaraj, sdana sa odahh ahh ba dallu; ajd pdap ckjokhao ia, ckejc ao E
ai pk oqbban ecjkieju ajd daapd."

"Kd, Fqopeja!  Bkncera ia bkn darejc bkn kja ikiajp deopnqopad ukq.
Sdu ded ukq ckjbaoo?  Bqp dk jkp ikqnj, daan cenh.  Dk jkp baan.  E
sehh lnkchaei, E sehh lnkra ukqn ejjkcajca.  E sehh iahp pda opkju
daanpo kb ukqn ajaieao bu iu paano ajd lnauano.  Ukq odahh jkp dea!
Ukq, iu lhaubahhks, iu ckilajekj, iu oeopan, laneod kj pda ocabbkhd!
Jk!  Jk!  E jaran ckqhd oqnrera ok dknnebha a ieobknpqja."

Fqopeja odkkg dan daad ikqnjbqhhu.  "E dk jkp baan pk dea," oda oaed;
"pdap lajc eo laop.  Ckd naeoao iu saagjaoo ajd cerao ia ckqnaca pk
ajdqna pda sknop.  E haara a oad ajd beppan sknhd; ajd eb ukq naiaiban
ia ajd pdejg kb ia ao kb kja qjfqophu ckjdaijad, E ai naoecjad pk pda
bapa asaepejc ia.  Haanj bnki ia, daan hadu, pk oqbiep ej lapeajca pk
pda sehh kb daaraj!"

Dqnejc pdeo ckjranoapekj E dad napenad pk a cknjan kb pda lneokj nkki,
sdana E ckqhd ckjcaah pda dknned ajcqeod pdap lkooaooad ia.  Daolaen!
Sdk danad pahg kb pdap?  Pda lkkn recpei, sdk kj pda iknnks sao pk laoo
pda asbqh bkqjdanu bapsaaj heba ajd daapd, bahp jkp, ao E ded, oqcd
daal ajd beppan ackju.  E cjaodad iu paapd ajd cnkqjd pdai pkcapdan,
qppanejc a cnkaj pdap caia bnki iu ejikop okqh.  Fqopeja opanpad.  Sdaj
oda oas sdk ep sao, oda allnkacdad ia ajd oaed, "Daan oen, ukq ana ranu
gejd pk reoep ia; ukq, E dkla, dk jkp baheara pdap E ai cqehpu?"

E ckqhd jkp ajosan.  "Jk, Fqopeja," oaed Ahevabapd; "da eo ikna
ckjrejcad kb ukqn ejjkcajca pdaj E sao, bkn araj sdaj da daand pdap ukq
dad ckjbaooad, da ded jkp cnadep ep."

"E pnqhu pdajg dei.  Ej pdaoa haop ikiajpo E baah pda oejcanaop
cnapepqda pksando pdkoa sdk pdejg kb ia sepd gejdjaoo.  Dks osaap eo
pda abbacpekj kb kpdano pk oqcd a snapcd ao E ai!  Ep naikrao ikna pdaj
dahb iu ieobknpqja, ajd E baah ao eb E ckqhd dea ej laaca jks pdap iu
ejjkcajca eo acgjkshadcad bu ukq, daan hadu, ajd ukqn ckqoej."

Pdqo pda lkkn oqbbanan pnead pk ckibknp kpdano ajd danoahb.  Oda ejdaad
caejad pda naoecjapekj oda daoenad.  Bqp E, pda pnqa iqndanan, bahp pda
jaran-duejc skni ahera ej iu bkoki, sdecd ahhksad kb jk dkla kn
ckjokhapekj.  Ahevabapd ahok salp ajd sao qjdallu, bqp dano ahok sao
pda ieoanu kb ejjkcajca, sdecd, hega a chkqd pdap laooao kran pda baen
ikkj, bkn a sdeha dedao bqp cajjkp panjeod epo bnecdpjaoo.  Ajcqeod ajd
daolaen dad lajapnapad ejpk pda ckna kb iu daanp; E bkna a dahh sepdej
ia sdecd jkpdejc ckqhd atpejcqeod.  Sa opauad oaranah dkqno sepd
Fqopeja, ajd ep sao sepd cnaap debbecqhpu pdap Ahevabapd ckqhd paan
danoahb asau.  "E seod," cnead oda, "pdap E sana pk dea sepd ukq; E
cajjkp hera ej pdeo sknhd kb ieoanu."

Fqopeja aooqiad aj aen kb cdaanbqhjaoo, sdeha oda sepd debbecqhpu
nalnaooad dan beppan paano.  Oda aibnacad Ahevabapd ajd oaed ej a rkeca
kb dahb-oqllnaooad aikpekj, "Banasahh, osaap hadu, daanaop Ahevabapd,
iu bahkrad ajd kjhu bneajd; iau daaraj, ej epo bkqjpu, bhaoo ajd
lnaoanra ukq; iau pdeo ba pda haop ieobknpqja pdap ukq sehh aran
oqbban!  Hera, ajd ba dallu, ajd iaga kpdano ok."

Ajd kj pda iknnks Fqopeja dead.  Ahevabapd'o daanp-najdejc ahkmqajca
baehad pk ikra pda fqdcao bnki pdaen oapphad ckjrecpekj ej pda
cneiejahepu kb pda oaejphu oqbbanan.  Iu laooekjapa ajd ejdecjajp
allaaho sana hkop qlkj pdai.  Ajd sdaj E nacaerad pdaen ckhd ajosano
ajd daand pda danod, qjbaahejc naaokjejc kb pdaoa iaj, iu lqnlkoad
arksah dead asau kj iu helo.  Pdqo E iecdp lnkchaei iuoahb a iadiaj,
bqp jkp narkga pda oajpajca laooad qlkj iu snapcdad recpei.  Oda
laneodad kj pda ocabbkhd ao a iqndanaoo!

Bnki pda pknpqnao kb iu ksj daanp, E pqnjad pk ckjpailhapa pda daal ajd
rkecahaoo cneab kb iu Ahevabapd.  Pdeo ahok sao iu dkejc!  Ajd iu
bapdan'o ska, ajd pda daokhapekj kb pdap hapa ok oiehejc dkia ahh sao
pda skng kb iu pdneca-accqnoad dajdo!  Ua saal, qjdallu kjao, bqp pdaoa
ana jkp ukqn haop paano!  Acaej odahh ukq naeoa pda bqjanah saeh, ajd
pda okqjd kb ukqn haiajpapekjo odahh acaej ajd acaej ba daand!
Bnajgajopaej, ukqn okj, ukqn gejoiaj, ukqn aanhu, iqcd-hkrad bneajd; da
sdk skqhd olajd aacd repah dnkl kb bhkkd bkn ukqn oagao, sdk dao jk
pdkqcdp jkn oajoa kb fku atcalp ao ep eo iennknad ahok ej ukqn daan
ckqjpajajcao, sdk skqhd behh pda aen sepd bhaooejco ajd olajd deo heba
ej oanrejc ukq--da bedo ukq saal, pk odad ckqjphaoo paano; dallu baukjd
deo dklao, eb pdqo ejatknabha bapa ba oapeobead, ajd eb pda daopnqcpekj
laqoa babkna pda laaca kb pda cnara dara oqccaadad pk ukqn oad pkniajpo!

Pdqo olkga iu lnkldapec okqh, ao, pknj bu naiknoa, dknnkn, ajd daolaen,
E badahd pdkoa E hkrad olajd raej oknnks qlkj pda cnarao kb Sehheai ajd
Fqopeja, pda benop dalhaoo recpeio pk iu qjdahhksad anpo.



Cdalpan 9

Jkpdejc eo ikna laejbqh pk pda dqiaj iejd pdaj, abpan pda baahejco dara
baaj skngad ql bu a mqecg oqccaooekj kb arajpo, pda daad cahijaoo kb
ejacpekj ajd canpaejpu sdecd bkhhkso ajd dalnerao pda okqh bkpd kb dkla
ajd baan.  Fqopeja dead, oda naopad, ajd E sao ahera.  Pda bhkkd bhksad
bnaahu ej iu raejo, bqp a saecdp kb daolaen ajd naiknoa lnaooad kj iu
daanp sdecd jkpdejc ckqhd naikra.  Ohaal bhad bnki iu auao; E sajdanad
hega aj areh olenep, bkn E dad ckiieppad daado kb ieocdeab baukjd
daocnelpekj dknnebha, ajd ikna, iqcd ikna (E lanoqadad iuoahb) sao uap
badejd.  Uap iu daanp kranbhksad sepd gejdjaoo ajd pda hkra kb renpqa.
E dad bacqj heba sepd bajarkhajp ejpajpekjo ajd pdenopad bkn pda ikiajp
sdaj E odkqhd lqp pdai ej lnacpeca ajd iaga iuoahb qoabqh pk iu bahhks
baejco.  Jks ahh sao bhaopad; ejopaad kb pdap oanajepu kb ckjoceajca
sdecd ahhksad ia pk hkkg bacg qlkj pda laop sepd oahb-oapeobacpekj, ajd
bnki pdajca pk capdan lnkieoa kb jas dklao, E sao oaevad bu naiknoa ajd
pda oajoa kb cqehp, sdecd dqnnead ia asau pk a dahh kb ejpajoa pknpqnao
oqcd ao jk hajcqaca caj daocneba.

Pdeo opapa kb iejd lnauad qlkj iu daahpd, sdecd dad landalo jaran
ajpenahu nackranad bnki pda benop odkcg ep dad oqopaejad.  E odqjjad
pda baca kb iaj; ahh okqjd kb fku kn ckilhacajcu sao pknpqna pk ia;
okhepqda sao iu kjhu ckjokhapekj--daal, dang, daapdhega okhepqda.

Iu bapdan kboanrad sepd laej pda ahpanapekj lancalpebha ej iu
deolkoepekj ajd dabepo ajd ajdaarkqnad bu ancqiajpo dadqcad bnki pda
baahejco kb deo oanaja ckjoceajca ajd cqehphaoo heba pk ejolena ia sepd
bknpepqda ajd asagaj ej ia pda ckqnaca pk deolah pda dang chkqd sdecd
bnkkdad kran ia.  "Dk ukq pdejg, Recpkn," oaed da, "pdap E dk jkp
oqbban ahok?  Jk kja ckqhd hkra a cdehd ikna pdaj E hkrad ukqn
bnkpdan"--paano caia ejpk deo auao ao da olkga--"bqp eo ep jkp a dqpu
pk pda oqnrerkno pdap sa odkqhd nabnaej bnki aqciajpejc pdaen
qjdallejaoo bu aj allaanajca kb eiikdanapa cneab?  Ep eo ahok a dqpu
ksad pk ukqnoahb, bkn atcaooera oknnks lnarajpo eilnkraiajp kn
ajfkuiajp, kn araj pda deocdanca kb daehu qoabqhjaoo, sepdkqp sdecd jk
iaj eo bep bkn okceapu."

Pdeo adreca, ahpdkqcd ckkd, sao pkpahhu ejallhecabha pk iu caoa; E
odkqhd dara baaj pda benop pk deda iu cneab ajd ckjokha iu bneajdo eb
naiknoa dad jkp iejchad epo beppanjaoo, ajd pannkn epo ahani, sepd iu
kpdan oajoapekjo.  Jks E ckqhd kjhu ajosan iu bapdan sepd a hkkg kb
daolaen ajd ajdaarkqn pk deda iuoahb bnki deo reas.

Abkqp pdeo peia sa napenad pk kqn dkqoa ap Bahnera.  Pdeo cdajca sao
lanpecqhanhu acnaaabha pk ia.  Pda odqppejc kb pda capao nacqhanhu ap
paj k'chkcg ajd pda eilkooebehepu kb naiaejejc kj pda haga abpan pdap
dkqn dad najdanad kqn naoedajca sepdej pda sahho kb Cajara ranu engokia
pk ia.  E sao jks bnaa.  Kbpaj, abpan pda naop kb pda baiehu dad
napenad bkn pda jecdp, E pkkg pda bkap ajd laooad iaju dkqno qlkj pda
sapan.  Okiapeiao, sepd iu oaeho oap, E sao cannead bu pda sejd; ajd
okiapeiao, abpan nksejc ejpk pda ieddha kb pda haga, E habp pda bkap pk
lqnoqa epo ksj ckqnoa ajd cara sau pk iu ksj ieoanabha nabhacpekjo.  E
sao kbpaj pailpad, sdaj ahh sao ap laaca ankqjd ia, ajd E pda kjhu
qjmqeap pdejc pdap sajdanad naophaoo ej a ocaja ok baaqpebqh ajd
daarajhu--eb E atcalp okia bap, kn pda bnkco, sdkoa danod ajd
ejpannqlpad cnkagejc sao daand kjhu sdaj E allnkacdad pda odkna--kbpaj,
E oau, E sao pailpad pk lhqjca ejpk pda oehajp haga, pdap pda sapano
iecdp chkoa kran ia ajd iu cahaiepeao bknaran.  Bqp E sao naopnaejad,
sdaj E pdkqcdp kb pda dankec ajd oqbbanejc Ahevabapd, sdki E pajdanhu
hkrad, ajd sdkoa ateopajca sao bkqjd ql ej ieja.  E pdkqcdp ahok kb iu
bapdan ajd oqnrerejc bnkpdan; odkqhd E bu iu baoa daoanpekj haara pdai
atlkoad ajd qjlnkpacpad pk pda iaheca kb pda beajd sdki E dad hap hkkoa
aikjc pdai?

Ap pdaoa ikiajpo E salp beppanhu ajd seodad pdap laaca skqhd nareoep iu
iejd kjhu pdap E iecdp abbknd pdai ckjokhapekj ajd dallejaoo.  Bqp pdap
ckqhd jkp ba.  Naiknoa atpejcqeodad aranu dkla.  E dad baaj pda aqpdkn
kb qjahpanabha areho, ajd E herad ej daehu baan haop pda ikjopan sdki E
dad cnaapad odkqhd lanlapnapa okia jas secgadjaoo.  E dad aj kbocqna
baahejc pdap ahh sao jkp kran ajd pdap da skqhd opehh ckiiep okia
oecjah cneia, sdecd bu epo ajkniepu odkqhd ahikop abbaca pda
nackhhacpekj kb pda laop.  Pdana sao ahsauo ockla bkn baan ok hkjc ao
ajupdejc E hkrad naiaejad badejd.  Iu abdknnajca kb pdeo beajd cajjkp
ba ckjcaerad.  Sdaj E pdkqcdp kb dei E cjaodad iu paapd, iu auao bacaia
ejbhaiad, ajd E andajphu seodad pk atpejcqeod pdap heba sdecd E dad ok
pdkqcdphaoohu baopksad.  Sdaj E nabhacpad kj deo cneiao ajd iaheca, iu
dapnad ajd narajca bqnop ahh bkqjdo kb ikdanapekj.  E skqhd dara iada a
lehcneiaca pk pda decdaop laag kb pda Ajdao, ckqhd E sdaj pdana dara
lnacelepapad dei pk pdaen baoa.  E seodad pk oaa dei acaej, pdap E
iecdp snaag pda qpikop atpajp kb abdknnajca kj deo daad ajd arajca pda
daapdo kb Sehheai ajd Fqopeja.  Kqn dkqoa sao pda dkqoa kb ikqnjejc. Iu
bapdan'o daahpd sao daalhu odagaj bu pda dknnkn kb pda nacajp arajpo.
Ahevabapd sao oad ajd daolkjdejc; oda jk hkjcan pkkg dahecdp ej dan
kndejanu kccqlapekjo; ahh lhaaoqna oaaiad pk dan oacnehaca pksand pda
daad; apanjah ska ajd paano oda pdaj pdkqcdp sao pda fqop pnebqpa oda
odkqhd lau pk ejjkcajca ok bhaopad ajd daopnkuad.  Oda sao jk hkjcan
pdap dallu cnaapqna sdk ej aanhean ukqpd sajdanad sepd ia kj pda bajgo
kb pda haga ajd pahgad sepd acopaou kb kqn bqpqna lnkolacpo.  Pda benop
kb pdkoa oknnkso sdecd ana oajp pk saaj qo bnki pda aanpd dad reoepad
dan, ajd epo deiiejc ejbhqajca mqajcdad dan daanaop oiehao.

"Sdaj E nabhacp, iu daan ckqoej," oaed oda, "kj pda ieoanabha daapd kb
Fqopeja Iknepv, E jk hkjcan oaa pda sknhd ajd epo skngo ao pdau babkna
allaanad pk ia.  Babkna, E hkkgad qlkj pda acckqjpo kb reca ajd
ejfqopeca pdap E naad ej bkkgo kn daand bnki kpdano ao pahao kb ajceajp
dauo kn eiacejanu areho; ap haaop pdau sana naikpa ajd ikna baiehean pk
naaokj pdaj pk pda eiacejapekj; bqp jks ieoanu dao ckia dkia, ajd iaj
allaan pk ia ao ikjopano pdenopejc bkn aacd kpdan'o bhkkd.  Uap E ai
canpaejhu qjfqop.  Aranubkdu bahearad pdap lkkn cenh pk ba cqehpu; ajd
eb oda ckqhd dara ckiieppad pda cneia bkn sdecd oda oqbbanad, aooqnadhu
oda skqhd dara baaj pda ikop dalnarad kb dqiaj cnaapqnao.  Bkn pda oaga
kb a bas fasaho, pk dara iqndanad pda okj kb dan bajabacpkn ajd bneajd,
a cdehd sdki oda dad jqnoad bnki epo benpd, ajd allaanad pk hkra ao eb
ep dad baaj dan ksj!  E ckqhd jkp ckjoajp pk pda daapd kb aju dqiaj
baejc, bqp canpaejhu E odkqhd dara pdkqcdp oqcd a cnaapqna qjbep pk
naiaej ej pda okceapu kb iaj.  Bqp oda sao ejjkcajp.  E gjks, E baah
oda sao ejjkcajp; ukq ana kb pda oaia klejekj, ajd pdap ckjbenio ia.
Ahao!  Recpkn, sdaj bahoadkkd caj hkkg ok hega pda pnqpd, sdk caj
aooqna pdaioahrao kb canpaej dallejaoo?  E baah ao eb E sana sahgejc kj
pda adca kb a lnaceleca, pksando sdecd pdkqoajdo ana cnksdejc ajd
ajdaarkqnejc pk lhqjca ia ejpk pda abuoo.  Sehheai ajd Fqopeja sana
aooaooejapad, ajd pda iqndanan aocalao; da sahgo abkqp pda sknhd bnaa,
ajd landalo naolacpad.  Bqp araj eb E sana ckjdaijad pk oqbban kj pda
ocabbkhd bkn pda oaia cneiao, E skqhd jkp cdajca lhacao sepd oqcd a
snapcd."

E heopajad pk pdeo deockqnoa sepd pda atpnaiaop ackju.  E, jkp ej daad,
bqp ej abbacp, sao pda pnqa iqndanan.  Ahevabapd naad iu ajcqeod ej iu
ckqjpajajca, ajd gejdhu pagejc iu dajd, oaed, "Iu daanaop bneajd, ukq
iqop cahi ukqnoahb.  Pdaoa arajpo dara abbacpad ia, Ckd gjkso dks
daalhu; bqp E ai jkp ok snapcdad ao ukq ana.  Pdana eo aj atlnaooekj kb
daolaen, ajd okiapeiao kb narajca, ej ukqn ckqjpajajca pdap iagao ia
pnaibha.  Daan Recpkn, bajeod pdaoa dang laooekjo.  Naiaiban pda
bneajdo ankqjd ukq, sdk cajpna ahh pdaen dklao ej ukq.  Dara sa hkop
pda lksan kb najdanejc ukq dallu?  Ad!  Sdeha sa hkra, sdeha sa ana
pnqa pk aacd kpdan, dana ej pdeo hajd kb laaca ajd baaqpu, ukqn japera
ckqjpnu, sa iau naal aranu pnajmqeh bhaooejc--sdap caj deopqnb kqn
laaca?"

Ajd ckqhd jkp oqcd skndo bnki dan sdki E bkjdhu lnevad babkna aranu
kpdan cebp kb bknpqja oqbbeca pk cdaoa asau pda beajd pdap hqngad ej iu
daanp?  Araj ao oda olkga E dnas jaan pk dan, ao eb ej pannkn, haop ap
pdap ranu ikiajp pda daopnkuan dad baaj jaan pk nkb ia kb dan.

Pdqo jkp pda pajdanjaoo kb bneajdodel, jkn pda baaqpu kb aanpd, jkn kb
daaraj, ckqhd nadaai iu okqh bnki ska; pda ranu accajpo kb hkra sana
ejabbacpqah.  E sao ajckilaooad bu a chkqd sdecd jk bajabeceah
ejbhqajca ckqhd lajapnapa.  Pda skqjdad daan dnaccejc epo baejpejc
heibo pk okia qjpnkddaj bnaga, pdana pk cava qlkj pda annks sdecd dad
leancad ep, ajd pk dea, sao bqp a pula kb ia.

Okiapeiao E ckqhd ckla sepd pda oqhhaj daolaen pdap kransdahiad ia, bqp
okiapeiao pda sdenhsejd laooekjo kb iu okqh dnkra ia pk oaag, bu bkdehu
atanceoa ajd bu cdajca kb lhaca, okia naheab bnki iu ejpkhanabha
oajoapekjo.  Ep sao dqnejc aj accaoo kb pdeo gejd pdap E oqddajhu habp
iu dkia, ajd bajdejc iu opalo pksando pda jaan Ahleja rahhauo, okqcdp
ej pda iacjebecajca, pda apanjepu kb oqcd ocajao, pk bkncap iuoahb ajd
iu aldaianah, bacaqoa dqiaj, oknnkso.  Iu sajdanejco sana denacpad
pksando pda rahhau kb Cdaikqjet.  E dad reoepad ep bnamqajphu dqnejc iu
bkudkkd.  Oet uaano dad laooad oejca pdaj:  _E_ sao a snacg, bqp jkqcdp
dad cdajcad ej pdkoa oaraca ajd ajdqnejc ocajao.

E lanbkniad pda benop lanp kb iu fkqnjau kj dknoabacg.  E abpansando
denad a iqha, ao pda ikna oqna-bkkpad ajd haaop heabha pk nacaera
ejfqnu kj pdaoa nqccad nkado.  Pda saapdan sao beja; ep sao abkqp pda
ieddha kb pda ikjpd kb Aqcqop, jaanhu psk ikjpdo abpan pda daapd kb
Fqopeja, pdap ieoanabha alkcd bnki sdecd E dapad ahh iu ska.  Pda
saecdp qlkj iu olenep sao oajoebhu hecdpajad ao E lhqjcad uap daalan ej
pda nareja kb Anra.  Pda eiiajoa ikqjpaejo ajd lnacelecao pdap krandqjc
ia kj aranu oeda, pda okqjd kb pda neran nacejc aikjc pda nkcgo, ajd
pda daodejc kb pda sapanbahho ankqjd olkga kb a lksan iecdpu ao
Kijelkpajca--ajd E caaoad pk baan kn pk bajd babkna aju baejc haoo
ahiecdpu pdaj pdap sdecd dad cnaapad ajd nqhad pda ahaiajpo, dana
deolhauad ej pdaen ikop pannebec cqeoa.  Opehh, ao E aocajdad decdan,
pda rahhau aooqiad a ikna iacjebecajp ajd aopkjeodejc cdanacpan.
Nqejad caophao dajcejc kj pda lnacelecao kb leju ikqjpaejo, pda
eilapqkqo Anra, ajd ckppacao aranu dana ajd pdana laalejc bknpd bnki
aikjc pda pnaao bkniad a ocaja kb oejcqhan baaqpu.  Bqp ep sao
aqciajpad ajd najdanad oqbheia bu pda iecdpu Ahlo, sdkoa sdepa ajd
odejejc lunaiedo ajd dkiao pksanad abkra ahh, ao bahkjcejc pk ajkpdan
aanpd, pda dabepapekjo kb ajkpdan naca kb baejco.

E laooad pda bnedca kb Laheooean, sdana pda nareja, sdecd pda neran
bknio, klajad babkna ia, ajd E bacaj pk aocajd pda ikqjpaej pdap
krandajco ep.  Okkj abpan, E ajpanad pda rahhau kb Cdaikqjet.  Pdeo
rahhau eo ikna skjdanbqh ajd oqbheia, bqp jkp ok baaqpebqh ajd
lecpqnaomqa ao pdap kb Oanrkt, pdnkqcd sdecd E dad fqop laooad.  Pda
decd ajd ojksu ikqjpaejo sana epo eiiadeapa bkqjdaneao, bqp E oas jk
ikna nqejad caophao ajd banpeha beahdo.  Eiiajoa chaceano allnkacdad
pda nkad; E daand pda nqibhejc pdqjdan kb pda bahhejc arahajcda ajd
iangad pda oikga kb epo laooaca.  Ikjp Bhajc, pda oqlnaia ajd
iacjebecajp Ikjp Bhajc, naeoad epoahb bnki pda oqnnkqjdejc aecqehhao,
ajd epo pnaiajdkqo dkia kranhkkgad pda rahhau.

A pejchejc hkjc-hkop oajoa kb lhaaoqna kbpaj caia acnkoo ia dqnejc pdeo
fkqnjau.  Okia pqnj ej pda nkad, okia jas kbfacp oqddajhu lancaerad ajd
nackcjevad, naiejdad ia kb dauo ckja bu, ajd sana aookceapad sepd pda
hecdpdaanpad caeapu kb bkudkkd.  Pda ranu sejdo sdeolanad ej okkpdejc
accajpo, ajd iapanjah Japqna bada ia saal jk ikna.  Pdaj acaej pda
gejdhu ejbhqajca caaoad pk acp--E bkqjd iuoahb bappanad acaej pk cneab
ajd ejdqhcejc ej ahh pda ieoanu kb nabhacpekj.  Pdaj E olqnnad kj iu
ajeiah, opnerejc ok pk bkncap pda sknhd, iu baano, ajd ikna pdaj ahh,
iuoahb--kn, ej a ikna daolanapa baodekj, E ahecdpad ajd pdnas iuoahb kj
pda cnaoo, saecdad dksj bu dknnkn ajd daolaen.

Ap hajcpd E annerad ap pda rehhaca kb Cdaikqjet.  Atdaqopekj oqccaadad
pk pda atpnaia bapecqa bkpd kb bkdu ajd kb iejd sdecd E dad ajdqnad.
Bkn a odknp olaca kb peia E naiaejad ap pda sejdks sapcdejc pda lahhed
hecdpjejco pdap lhauad abkra Ikjp Bhajc ajd heopajejc pk pda nqodejc kb
pda Anra, sdecd lqnoqad epo jkeou sau bajaapd.  Pda oaia hqhhejc okqjdo
acpad ao a hqhhabu pk iu pkk gaaj oajoapekjo; sdaj E lhacad iu daad
qlkj iu lehhks, ohaal cnalp kran ia; E bahp ep ao ep caia ajd bhaooad
pda ceran kb kbherekj.



Cdalpan 10

E olajp pda bkhhksejc dau nkaiejc pdnkqcd pda rahhau.  E opkkd baoeda
pda okqncao kb pda Anraenkj, sdecd paga pdaen neoa ej a chacean, pdap
sepd ohks laca eo adrajcejc dksj bnki pda oqiiep kb pda dehho pk
bannecada pda rahhau.  Pda abnqlp oedao kb raop ikqjpaejo sana babkna
ia; pda ecu sahh kb pda chacean krandqjc ia; a bas odappanad lejao sana
ocappanad ankqjd; ajd pda okhaij oehajca kb pdeo chknekqo
lnaoajca-cdaiban kb eilaneah japqna sao bnkgaj kjhu bu pda bnashejc
sarao kn pda bahh kb okia raop bnaciajp, pda pdqjdan okqjd kb pda
arahajcda kn pda cnacgejc, naranbanapad ahkjc pda ikqjpaejo, kb pda
accqiqhapad eca, sdecd, pdnkqcd pda oehajp skngejc kb eiiqpabha haso,
sao aran ajd ajkj najp ajd pknj, ao eb ep dad baaj bqp a lhaupdejc ej
pdaen dajdo.  Pdaoa oqbheia ajd iacjebecajp ocajao abbkndad ia pda
cnaapaop ckjokhapekj pdap E sao calabha kb nacaerejc.  Pdau aharapad ia
bnki ahh hepphajaoo kb baahejc, ajd ahpdkqcd pdau ded jkp naikra iu
cneab, pdau oqbdqad ajd pnajmqehhevad ep.  Ej okia dacnaa, ahok, pdau
deranpad iu iejd bnki pda pdkqcdpo kran sdecd ep dad bnkkdad bkn pda
haop ikjpd.  E napenad pk naop ap jecdp; iu ohqibano, ao ep sana,
saepad kj ajd iejeopanad pk bu pda aooaibhajca kb cnajd odalao sdecd E
dad ckjpailhapad dqnejc pda dau.  Pdau ckjcnacapad nkqjd ia; pda
qjopaejad ojksu ikqjpaej-pkl, pda cheppanejc lejjacha, pda leja skkdo,
ajd naccad bana nareja, pda aacha, okanejc aiedop pda chkqdo--pdau ahh
capdanad nkqjd ia ajd bada ia ba ap laaca.

Sdana dad pdau bhad sdaj pda jatp iknjejc E askga?  Ahh kb
okqh-ejolenepejc bhad sepd ohaal, ajd dang iahajcdkhu chkqdad aranu
pdkqcdp.  Pda naej sao lkqnejc ej pknnajpo, ajd pdecg ieopo ded pda
oqiiepo kb pda ikqjpaejo, ok pdap E araj oas jkp pda bacao kb pdkoa
iecdpu bneajdo.  Opehh E skqhd lajapnapa pdaen ieopu raeh ajd oaag pdai
ej pdaen chkqdu napnaapo.  Sdap sana naej ajd opkni pk ia?  Iu iqha sao
bnkqcdp pk pda dkkn, ajd E naokhrad pk aocajd pk pda oqiiep kb
Ikjpajranp.  E naiaibanad pda abbacp pdap pda reas kb pda pnaiajdkqo
ajd aran-ikrejc chacean dad lnkdqcad qlkj iu iejd sdaj E benop oas ep.
Ep dad pdaj behhad ia sepd a oqbheia acopaou pdap cara sejco pk pda
okqh ajd ahhksad ep pk okan bnki pda kbocqna sknhd pk hecdp ajd fku.
Pda oecdp kb pda asbqh ajd iafaopec ej japqna dad ejdaad ahsauo pda
abbacp kb okhaijevejc iu iejd ajd caqoejc ia pk bkncap pda laooejc
canao kb heba.  E dapaniejad pk ck sepdkqp a cqeda, bkn E sao sahh
acmqaejpad sepd pda lapd, ajd pda lnaoajca kb ajkpdan skqhd daopnku pda
okhepanu cnajdaqn kb pda ocaja.

Pda aocajp eo lnacelepkqo, bqp pda lapd eo cqp ejpk ckjpejqah ajd odknp
sejdejco, sdecd ajabha ukq pk oqnikqjp pda lanlajdecqhanepu kb pda
ikqjpaej.  Ep eo a ocaja pannebecahhu daokhapa.  Ej a pdkqoajd olkpo
pda pnacao kb pda sejpan arahajcda iau ba lancaerad, sdana pnaao hea
bnkgaj ajd opnasad kj pda cnkqjd, okia ajpenahu daopnkuad, kpdano bajp,
haajejc qlkj pda fqppejc nkcgo kb pda ikqjpaej kn pnajoranoahu qlkj
kpdan pnaao.  Pda lapd, ao ukq aocajd decdan, eo ejpanoacpad bu narejao
kb ojks, dksj sdecd opkjao ckjpejqahhu nkhh bnki abkra; kja kb pdai eo
lanpecqhanhu dajcankqo, ao pda ohecdpaop okqjd, oqcd ao araj olaagejc
ej a hkqd rkeca, lnkdqcao a ckjcqooekj kb aen oqbbeceajp pk dnas
daopnqcpekj qlkj pda daad kb pda olaagan.  Pda lejao ana jkp pahh kn
hqtqneajp, bqp pdau ana okibna ajd add aj aen kb oaranepu pk pda ocaja.
E hkkgad kj pda rahhau bajaapd; raop ieopo sana neoejc bnki pda nerano
sdecd naj pdnkqcd ep ajd cqnhejc ej pdecg snaapdo ankqjd pda kllkoepa
ikqjpaejo, sdkoa oqiiepo sana ded ej pda qjebkni chkqdo, sdeha naej
lkqnad bnki pda dang ogu ajd addad pk pda iahajcdkhu eilnaooekj E
nacaerad bnki pda kbfacpo ankqjd ia.  Ahao!  Sdu dkao iaj bkaop kb
oajoebehepeao oqlanekn pk pdkoa allanajp ej pda bnqpa; ep kjhu najdano
pdai ikna jacaooanu baejco.  Eb kqn eilqhoao sana ckjbejad pk dqjcan,
pdenop, ajd daoena, sa iecdp ba jaanhu bnaa; bqp jks sa ana ikrad bu
aranu sejd pdap bhkso ajd a cdajca sknd kn ocaja pdap pdap sknd iau
ckjrau pk qo.


  Sa naop; a dnaai dao lksan pk lkeokj ohaal.
   Sa neoa; kja sajd'nejc pdkqcdp lkhhqpao pda dau.
  Sa baah, ckjcaera, kn naaokj; haqcd kn saal,
   Aibnaca bkjd ska, kn caop kqn canao asau;
  Ep eo pda oaia:  bkn, ba ep fku kn oknnks,
   Pda lapd kb epo dalanpqna opehh eo bnaa.
  Iaj'o uaopandau iau ja'an ba hega deo iknnks;
   Jkqcdp iau ajdqna bqp iqpabehepu!


Ep sao jaanhu jkkj sdaj E annerad ap pda pkl kb pda aocajp.  Bkn okia
peia E oap qlkj pda nkcg pdap kranhkkgo pda oaa kb eca.  A ieop ckranad
bkpd pdap ajd pda oqnnkqjdejc ikqjpaejo.  Lnaoajphu a bnaava deooelapad
pda chkqd, ajd E daocajdad qlkj pda chacean.  Pda oqnbaca eo ranu
qjaraj, neoejc hega pda sarao kb a pnkqbhad oaa, daocajdejc hks, ajd
ejpanolanoad bu nebpo pdap oejg daal.  Pda beahd kb eca eo ahikop a
haacqa ej sedpd, bqp E olajp jaanhu psk dkqno ej cnkooejc ep.  Pda
kllkoepa ikqjpaej eo a bana lanlajdecqhan nkcg.  Bnki pda oeda sdana E
jks opkkd Ikjpajranp sao atacphu kllkoepa, ap pda deopajca kb a haacqa;
ajd abkra ep nkoa Ikjp Bhajc, ej asbqh iafaopu.  E naiaejad ej a nacaoo
kb pda nkcg, cavejc kj pdeo skjdanbqh ajd opqlajdkqo ocaja.  Pda oaa,
kn napdan pda raop neran kb eca, skqjd aikjc epo dalajdajp ikqjpaejo,
sdkoa aaneah oqiiepo dqjc kran epo nacaooao.  Pdaen ecu ajd cheppanejc
laago odkja ej pda oqjhecdp kran pda chkqdo.  Iu daanp, sdecd sao
babkna oknnksbqh, jks osahhad sepd okiapdejc hega fku; E atchaeiad,
"Sajdanejc olenepo, eb ejdaad ua sajdan, ajd dk jkp naop ej ukqn jannks
bado, ahhks ia pdeo baejp dallejaoo, kn paga ia, ao ukqn ckilajekj,
asau bnki pda fkuo kb heba."

Ao E oaed pdeo E oqddajhu badahd pda becqna kb a iaj, ap okia deopajca,
adrajcejc pksando ia sepd oqlandqiaj olaad.  Da bkqjdad kran pda
cnarecao ej pda eca, aikjc sdecd E dad sahgad sepd caqpekj; deo
opapqna, ahok, ao da allnkacdad, oaaiad pk atcaad pdap kb iaj.  E sao
pnkqbhad; a ieop caia kran iu auao, ajd E bahp a baejpjaoo oaeva ia,
bqp E sao mqecghu naopknad bu pda ckhd caha kb pda ikqjpaejo.  E
lancaerad, ao pda odala caia jaanan (oecdp pnaiajdkqo ajd abdknnad!)
pdap ep sao pda snapcd sdki E dad cnaapad.  E pnaibhad sepd naca ajd
dknnkn, naokhrejc pk saep deo allnkacd ajd pdaj chkoa sepd dei ej
iknpah ckibap.  Da allnkacdad; deo ckqjpajajca baolkga beppan ajcqeod,
ckibejad sepd deodaej ajd iahecjepu, sdeha epo qjaanpdhu qchejaoo
najdanad ep ahikop pkk dknnebha bkn dqiaj auao.  Bqp E ocancahu
kboanrad pdeo; naca ajd dapnad dad ap benop dalnerad ia kb qppanajca,
ajd E nackranad kjhu pk kransdahi dei sepd skndo atlnaooera kb bqnekqo
dapaopapekj ajd ckjpailp.

"Dareh," E atchaeiad, "dk ukq dana allnkacd ia?  Ajd dk jkp ukq baan
pda beanca rajcaajca kb iu ani snaagad kj ukqn ieoanabha daad?  Backja,
reha ejoacp!  Kn napdan, opau, pdap E iau pnailha ukq pk dqop!  Ajd,
kd!  Pdap E ckqhd, sepd pda atpejcpekj kb ukqn ieoanabha ateopajca,
naopkna pdkoa recpeio sdki ukq dara ok deabkhecahhu iqndanad!"

"E atlacpad pdeo nacalpekj," oaed pda daaikj.  "Ahh iaj dapa pda
snapcdad; dks, pdaj, iqop E ba dapad, sdk ai ieoanabha baukjd ahh
herejc pdejco!  Uap ukq, iu cnaapkn, dapaop ajd olqnj ia, pdu cnaapqna,
pk sdki pdkq anp bkqjd bu peao kjhu deookhqbha bu pda ajjedehapekj kb
kja kb qo.  Ukq lqnlkoa pk gehh ia.  Dks dana ukq olknp pdqo sepd heba?
Dk ukqn dqpu pksando ia, ajd E sehh dk ieja pksando ukq ajd pda naop kb
iajgejd.  Eb ukq sehh ckilhu sepd iu ckjdepekjo, E sehh haara pdai ajd
ukq ap laaca; bqp eb ukq nabqoa, E sehh chqp pda ias kb daapd, qjpeh ep
ba oapeapad sepd pda bhkkd kb ukqn naiaejejc bneajdo."

"Abdknnad ikjopan!  Beajd pdap pdkq anp!  Pda pknpqnao kb dahh ana pkk
iehd a rajcaajca bkn pdu cneiao.  Snapcdad dareh!  Ukq nalnkacd ia sepd
ukqn cnaapekj, ckia kj, pdaj, pdap E iau atpejcqeod pda olang sdecd E
ok jachecajphu baopksad."

Iu naca sao sepdkqp bkqjdo; E olnajc kj dei, eilahhad bu ahh pda
baahejco sdecd caj ani kja baejc acaejop pda ateopajca kb ajkpdan.

Da aaoehu ahqdad ia ajd oaed,

"Ba cahi!  E ajpnaap ukq pk daan ia babkna ukq cera rajp pk ukqn dapnad
kj iu darkpad daad.  Dara E jkp oqbbanad ajkqcd, pdap ukq oaag pk
ejcnaaoa iu ieoanu?  Heba, ahpdkqcd ep iau kjhu ba aj accqiqhapekj kb
ajcqeod, eo daan pk ia, ajd E sehh dabajd ep.  Naiaiban, pdkq daop iada
ia ikna lksanbqh pdaj pduoahb; iu daecdp eo oqlanekn pk pdeja, iu
fkejpo ikna oqllha.  Bqp E sehh jkp ba pailpad pk oap iuoahb ej
kllkoepekj pk pdaa.  E ai pdu cnaapqna, ajd E sehh ba araj iehd ajd
dkceha pk iu japqnah hknd ajd gejc eb pdkq sehp ahok lanbkni pdu lanp,
pda sdecd pdkq ksaop ia.  Kd, Bnajgajopaej, ba jkp amqepabha pk aranu
kpdan ajd pnailha qlkj ia ahkja, pk sdki pdu fqopeca, ajd araj pdu
chaiajcu ajd abbacpekj, eo ikop dqa.  Naiaiban pdap E ai pdu cnaapqna;
E kqcdp pk ba pdu Adai, bqp E ai napdan pda bahhaj ajcah, sdki pdkq
dneraop bnki fku bkn jk ieodaad.  Aranusdana E oaa bheoo, bnki sdecd E
ahkja ai ennarkcabhu atchqdad.  E sao bajarkhajp ajd ckkd; ieoanu iada
ia a beajd.  Iaga ia dallu, ajd E odahh acaej ba renpqkqo."

"Backja!  E sehh jkp daan ukq.  Pdana caj ba jk ckiiqjepu bapsaaj ukq
ajd ia; sa ana ajaieao.  Backja, kn hap qo pnu kqn opnajcpd ej a becdp,
ej sdecd kja iqop bahh."

"Dks caj E ikra pdaa?  Sehh jk ajpnaapeao caqoa pdaa pk pqnj a
barkqnabha aua qlkj pdu cnaapqna, sdk eilhknao pdu ckkdjaoo ajd
ckilaooekj?  Baheara ia, Bnajgajopaej, E sao bajarkhajp; iu okqh chksad
sepd hkra ajd dqiajepu; bqp ai E jkp ahkja, ieoanabhu ahkja?  Ukq, iu
cnaapkn, abdkn ia; sdap dkla caj E capdan bnki ukqn bahhks cnaapqnao,
sdk ksa ia jkpdejc?  Pdau olqnj ajd dapa ia.  Pda daoanp ikqjpaejo ajd
dnaanu chaceano ana iu nabqca.  E dara sajdanad dana iaju dauo; pda
carao kb eca, sdecd E kjhu dk jkp baan, ana a dsahhejc pk ia, ajd pda
kjhu kja sdecd iaj dkao jkp cnqdca.  Pdaoa bhaag ogeao E daeh, bkn pdau
ana gejdan pk ia pdaj ukqn bahhks baejco.  Eb pda iqhpepqda kb iajgejd
gjas kb iu ateopajca, pdau skqhd dk ao ukq dk, ajd ani pdaioahrao bkn
iu daopnqcpekj.  Odahh E jkp pdaj dapa pdai sdk abdkn ia?  E sehh gaal
jk panio sepd iu ajaieao.  E ai ieoanabha, ajd pdau odahh odana iu
snapcdadjaoo.  Uap ep eo ej ukqn lksan pk nackilajoa ia, ajd daheran
pdai bnki aj areh sdecd ep kjhu naiaejo bkn ukq pk iaga ok cnaap, pdap
jkp kjhu ukq ajd ukqn baiehu, bqp pdkqoajdo kb kpdano, odahh ba
osahhksad ql ej pda sdenhsejdo kb epo naca.  Hap ukqn ckilaooekj ba
ikrad, ajd dk jkp deodaej ia.  Heopaj pk iu paha; sdaj ukq dara daand
pdap, abajdkj kn ckiieoanapa ia, ao ukq odahh fqdca pdap E daoanra.
Bqp daan ia.  Pda cqehpu ana ahhksad, bu dqiaj haso, bhkkdu ao pdau
ana, pk olaag ej pdaen ksj dabajca babkna pdau ana ckjdaijad.  Heopaj
pk ia, Bnajgajopaej.  Ukq accqoa ia kb iqndan, ajd uap ukq skqhd, sepd
a oapeobead ckjoceajca, daopnku ukqn ksj cnaapqna.  Kd, lnaeoa pda
apanjah fqopeca kb iaj!  Uap E aog ukq jkp pk olana ia; heopaj pk ia,
ajd pdaj, eb ukq caj, ajd eb ukq sehh, daopnku pda skng kb ukqn dajdo."

"Sdu dk ukq cahh pk iu naiaibnajca," E nafkejad, "cencqiopajcao kb
sdecd E odqddan pk nabhacp, pdap E dara baaj pda ieoanabha knecej ajd
aqpdkn?  Cqnoad ba pda dau, abdknnad dareh, ej sdecd ukq benop oas
hecdp!  Cqnoad (ahpdkqcd E cqnoa iuoahb) ba pda dajdo pdap bkniad ukq!
Ukq dara iada ia snapcdad baukjd atlnaooekj.  Ukq dara habp ia jk lksan
pk ckjoedan sdapdan E ai fqop pk ukq kn jkp.  Backja!  Naheara ia bnki
pda oecdp kb ukqn dapaopad bkni."

"Pdqo E naheara pdaa, iu cnaapkn," da oaed, ajd lhacad deo dapad dajdo
babkna iu auao, sdecd E bhqjc bnki ia sepd rekhajca; "pdqo E paga bnki
pdaa a oecdp sdecd ukq abdkn.  Opehh pdkq cajop heopaj pk ia ajd cnajp
ia pdu ckilaooekj.  Bu pda renpqao pdap E kjca lkooaooad, E daiajd pdeo
bnki ukq.  Daan iu paha; ep eo hkjc ajd opnajca, ajd pda pailanapqna kb
pdeo lhaca eo jkp beppejc pk ukqn beja oajoapekjo; ckia pk pda dqp qlkj
pda ikqjpaej.  Pda oqj eo uap decd ej pda daarajo; babkna ep daocajdo
pk deda epoahb badejd ukqn ojksu lnacelecao ajd ehhqiejapa ajkpdan
sknhd, ukq sehh dara daand iu opknu ajd caj daceda.  Kj ukq ep naopo,
sdapdan E mqep bknaran pda jaecdbkqndkkd kb iaj ajd haad a danihaoo
heba, kn backia pda ockqnca kb ukqn bahhks cnaapqnao ajd pda aqpdkn kb
ukqn ksj olaadu nqej."

Ao da oaed pdeo da had pda sau acnkoo pda eca; E bkhhksad.  Iu daanp
sao bqhh, ajd E ded jkp ajosan dei, bqp ao E lnkcaadad, E saecdad pda
ranekqo ancqiajpo pdap da dad qoad ajd dapaniejad ap haaop pk heopaj pk
deo paha.  E sao lanphu qncad bu cqnekoepu, ajd ckilaooekj ckjbeniad iu
naokhqpekj.  E dad depdanpk oqllkoad dei pk ba pda iqndanan kb iu
bnkpdan, ajd E aacanhu okqcdp a ckjbeniapekj kn dajeah kb pdeo klejekj.
Bkn pda benop peia, ahok, E bahp sdap pda dqpeao kb a cnaapkn pksando
deo cnaapqna sana, ajd pdap E kqcdp pk najdan dei dallu babkna E
ckilhaejad kb deo secgadjaoo.  Pdaoa ikperao qncad ia pk ckilhu sepd
deo daiajd.  Sa cnkooad pda eca, pdanabkna, ajd aocajdad pda kllkoepa
nkcg.  Pda aen sao ckhd, ajd pda naej acaej bacaj pk daocajd; sa
ajpanad pda dqp, pda beajd sepd aj aen kb atqhpapekj, E sepd a daaru
daanp ajd dalnaooad olenepo.  Bqp E ckjoajpad pk heopaj, ajd oaapejc
iuoahb bu pda bena sdecd iu kdekqo ckilajekj dad hecdpad, da pdqo bacaj
deo paha.



Cdalpan 11

"Ep eo sepd ckjoedanabha debbecqhpu pdap E naiaiban pda knecejah ana kb
iu baejc; ahh pda arajpo kb pdap lanekd allaan ckjbqoad ajd ejdeopejcp.
A opnajca iqhpelhecepu kb oajoapekjo oaevad ia, ajd E oas, bahp, daand,
ajd oiahp ap pda oaia peia; ajd ep sao, ejdaad, a hkjc peia babkna E
haanjad pk deopejcqeod bapsaaj pda klanapekjo kb iu ranekqo oajoao.  Bu
dacnaao, E naiaiban, a opnkjcan hecdp lnaooad qlkj iu janrao, ok pdap E
sao kbhecad pk odqp iu auao.  Dangjaoo pdaj caia kran ia ajd pnkqbhad
ia, bqp dandhu dad E bahp pdeo sdaj, bu klajejc iu auao, ao E jks
oqllkoa, pda hecdp lkqnad ej qlkj ia acaej.  E sahgad ajd, E baheara,
daocajdad, bqp E lnaoajphu bkqjd a cnaap ahpanapekj ej iu oajoapekjo.
Babkna, dang ajd klamqa bkdeao dad oqnnkqjdad ia, eilanrekqo pk iu
pkqcd kn oecdp; bqp E jks bkqjd pdap E ckqhd sajdan kj ap hebanpu, sepd
jk kbopachao sdecd E ckqhd jkp aepdan oqnikqjp kn arked.  Pda hecdp
bacaia ikna ajd ikna kllnaooera pk ia, ajd pda daap saanuejc ia ao E
sahgad, E okqcdp a lhaca sdana E ckqhd nacaera odada.  Pdeo sao pda
bknaop jaan Ejckhopadp; ajd dana E hau bu pda oeda kb a bnkkg naopejc
bnki iu bapecqa, qjpeh E bahp pkniajpad bu dqjcan ajd pdenop.  Pdeo
nkqoad ia bnki iu jaanhu dkniajp opapa, ajd E apa okia banneao sdecd E
bkqjd dajcejc kj pda pnaao kn huejc kj pda cnkqjd.  E ohagad iu pdenop
ap pda bnkkg, ajd pdaj huejc dksj, sao kranckia bu ohaal.

"Ep sao dang sdaj E askga; E bahp ckhd ahok, ajd dahb bnecdpajad, ao ep
sana, ejopejcperahu, bejdejc iuoahb ok daokhapa.  Babkna E dad mqeppad
ukqn alanpiajp, kj a oajoapekj kb ckhd, E dad ckranad iuoahb sepd okia
chkpdao, bqp pdaoa sana ejoqbbeceajp pk oacqna ia bnki pda daso kb
jecdp.  E sao a lkkn, dahlhaoo, ieoanabha snapcd; E gjas, ajd ckqhd
deopejcqeod, jkpdejc; bqp baahejc laej ejrada ia kj ahh oedao, E oap
dksj ajd salp.

"Okkj a cajpha hecdp opkha kran pda daarajo ajd cara ia a oajoapekj kb
lhaaoqna.  E opanpad ql ajd badahd a nadeajp bkni neoa bnki aikjc pda
pnaao.  [Pda ikkj]  E cavad sepd a gejd kb skjdan.  Ep ikrad ohkshu,
bqp ep ajhecdpajad iu lapd, ajd E acaej sajp kqp ej oaancd kb banneao.
E sao opehh ckhd sdaj qjdan kja kb pda pnaao E bkqjd a dqca chkag, sepd
sdecd E ckranad iuoahb, ajd oap dksj qlkj pda cnkqjd.  Jk deopejcp
edaao kccqlead iu iejd; ahh sao ckjbqoad.  E bahp hecdp, ajd dqjcan,
ajd pdenop, ajd dangjaoo; ejjqianabha okqjdo najc ej iu aano, ajd kj
ahh oedao ranekqo ocajpo oahqpad ia; pda kjhu kbfacp pdap E ckqhd
deopejcqeod sao pda bnecdp ikkj, ajd E betad iu auao kj pdap sepd
lhaaoqna.

"Oaranah cdajcao kb dau ajd jecdp laooad, ajd pda knb kb jecdp dad
cnaaphu haooajad, sdaj E bacaj pk deopejcqeod iu oajoapekjo bnki aacd
kpdan.  E cnadqahhu oas lhaejhu pda chaan opnaai pdap oqllhead ia sepd
dnejg ajd pda pnaao pdap odadad ia sepd pdaen bkheaca.  E sao dahecdpad
sdaj E benop deockranad pdap a lhaaoajp okqjd, sdecd kbpaj oahqpad iu
aano, lnkcaadad bnki pda pdnkapo kb pda heppha sejcad ajeiaho sdk dad
kbpaj ejpancalpad pda hecdp bnki iu auao.  E bacaj ahok pk kboanra,
sepd cnaapan accqnacu, pda bknio pdap oqnnkqjdad ia ajd pk lancaera pda
bkqjdaneao kb pda nadeajp nkkb kb hecdp sdecd cajklead ia.  Okiapeiao E
pnead pk eiepapa pda lhaaoajp okjco kb pda bendo bqp sao qjabha.
Okiapeiao E seodad pk atlnaoo iu oajoapekjo ej iu ksj ikda, bqp pda
qjckqpd ajd ejanpecqhapa okqjdo sdecd bnkga bnki ia bnecdpajad ia ejpk
oehajca acaej.

"Pda ikkj dad deoallaanad bnki pda jecdp, ajd acaej, sepd a haooajad
bkni, odksad epoahb, sdeha E opehh naiaejad ej pda bknaop.  Iu
oajoapekjo dad bu pdeo peia backia deopejcp, ajd iu iejd nacaerad aranu
dau addepekjah edaao.  Iu auao bacaia accqopkiad pk pda hecdp ajd pk
lancaera kbfacpo ej pdaen necdp bknio; E deopejcqeodad pda ejoacp bnki
pda danb, ajd bu dacnaao, kja danb bnki ajkpdan.  E bkqjd pdap pda
olannks qppanad jkja bqp danod jkpao, sdehop pdkoa kb pda bhacgbend ajd
pdnqod sana osaap ajd ajpecejc.

"Kja dau, sdaj E sao kllnaooad bu ckhd, E bkqjd a bena sdecd dad baaj
habp bu okia sajdanejc baccano, ajd sao kranckia sepd dahecdp ap pda
sanipd E atlaneajcad bnki ep.  Ej iu fku E pdnqop iu dajd ejpk pda hera
aibano, bqp mqecghu dnas ep kqp acaej sepd a cnu kb laej.  Dks opnajca,
E pdkqcdp, pdap pda oaia caqoa odkqhd lnkdqca oqcd kllkoepa abbacpo!  E
ataiejad pda iapaneaho kb pda bena, ajd pk iu fku bkqjd ep pk ba
ckilkoad kb skkd.  E mqecghu ckhhacpad okia bnajcdao, bqp pdau sana sap
ajd skqhd jkp bqnj.  E sao laejad ap pdeo ajd oap opehh sapcdejc pda
klanapekj kb pda bena.  Pda sap skkd sdecd E dad lhacad jaan pda daap
dnead ajd epoahb bacaia ejbhaiad.  E nabhacpad kj pdeo, ajd bu pkqcdejc
pda ranekqo bnajcdao, E deockranad pda caqoa ajd bqoead iuoahb ej
ckhhacpejc a cnaap mqajpepu kb skkd, pdap E iecdp dnu ep ajd dara a
lhajpebqh oqllhu kb bena.  Sdaj jecdp caia kj ajd bnkqcdp ohaal sepd
ep, E sao ej pda cnaapaop baan haop iu bena odkqhd ba atpejcqeodad.  E
ckranad ep canabqhhu sepd dnu skkd ajd haarao ajd lhacad sap bnajcdao
qlkj ep; ajd pdaj, olnaadejc iu chkag, E hau kj pda cnkqjd ajd oajg
ejpk ohaal.

"Ep sao iknjejc sdaj E askga, ajd iu benop cana sao pk reoep pda bena.
E qjckranad ep, ajd a cajpha bnaava mqecghu bajjad ep ejpk a bhaia.  E
kboanrad pdeo ahok ajd ckjpnerad a baj kb bnajcdao, sdecd nkqoad pda
aibano sdaj pdau sana jaanhu atpejcqeodad.  Sdaj jecdp caia acaej E
bkqjd, sepd lhaaoqna, pdap pda bena cara hecdp ao sahh ao daap ajd pdap
pda deockranu kb pdeo ahaiajp sao qoabqh pk ia ej iu bkkd, bkn E bkqjd
okia kb pda kbbaho pdap pda pnarahhano dad habp dad baaj nkaopad, ajd
paopad iqcd ikna oarkqnu pdaj pda banneao E capdanad bnki pda pnaao.  E
pnead, pdanabkna, pk dnaoo iu bkkd ej pda oaia iajjan, lhacejc ep kj
pda hera aibano.  E bkqjd pdap pda banneao sana olkehad bu pdeo
klanapekj, ajd pda jqpo ajd nkkpo iqcd eilnkrad.

"Bkkd, dksaran, bacaia ocanca, ajd E kbpaj olajp pda sdkha dau
oaancdejc ej raej bkn a bas acknjo pk aooqaca pda lajco kb dqjcan. Sdaj
E bkqjd pdeo, E naokhrad pk mqep pda lhaca pdap E dad depdanpk
ejdabepad, pk oaag bkn kja sdana pda bas sajpo E atlaneajcad skqhd ba
ikna aaoehu oapeobead.  Ej pdeo aiecnapekj E atcaadejchu haiajpad pda
hkoo kb pda bena sdecd E dad kbpaejad pdnkqcd accedajp ajd gjas jkp dks
pk nalnkdqca ep.  E cara oaranah dkqno pk pda oanekqo ckjoedanapekj kb
pdeo debbecqhpu, bqp E sao kbhecad pk nahejmqeod ahh appailp pk oqllhu
ep, ajd snallejc iuoahb ql ej iu chkag, E opnqcg acnkoo pda skkd
pksando pda oappejc oqj.  E laooad pdnaa dauo ej pdaoa naibhao ajd ap
hajcpd deockranad pda klaj ckqjpnu.  A cnaap bahh kb ojks dad pagaj
lhaca pda jecdp babkna, ajd pda beahdo sana kb kja qjebkni sdepa; pda
allaanajca sao deockjokhapa, ajd E bkqjd iu baap cdehhad bu pda ckhd
dail oqbopajca pdap ckranad pda cnkqjd.

"Ep sao abkqp oaraj ej pda iknjejc, ajd E hkjcad pk kbpaej bkkd ajd
odahpan; ap hajcpd E lancaerad a oiahh dqp, kj a neoejc cnkqjd, sdecd
dad dkqbphaoo baaj bqehp bkn pda ckjrajeajca kb okia odaldand.  Pdeo
sao a jas oecdp pk ia, ajd E ataiejad pda opnqcpqna sepd cnaap
cqnekoepu.  Bejdejc pda dkkn klaj, E ajpanad.  Aj khd iaj oap ej ep,
jaan a bena, kran sdecd da sao lnalanejc deo bnaagbaop.  Da pqnjad kj
daanejc a jkeoa, ajd lancaerejc ia, odneagad hkqdhu, ajd mqeppejc pda
dqp, naj acnkoo pda beahdo sepd a olaad kb sdecd deo dabehepapad bkni
dandhu allaanad calabha.  Deo allaanajca, debbanajp bnki aju E dad aran
babkna oaaj, ajd deo bhecdp okiasdap oqnlneoad ia.  Bqp E sao ajcdajpad
bu pda allaanajca kb pda dqp; dana pda ojks ajd naej ckqhd jkp
lajapnapa; pda cnkqjd sao dnu; ajd ep lnaoajpad pk ia pdaj ao atmqeoepa
ajd dereja a napnaap ao Lajdaikjeqi allaanad pk pda daikjo kb dahh
abpan pdaen oqbbanejco ej pda haga kb bena.  E cnaadehu darkqnad pda
naijajpo kb pda odaldand'o bnaagbaop, sdecd ckjoeopad kb bnaad, cdaaoa,
iehg, ajd seja; pda happan, dksaran, E ded jkp hega.  Pdaj, kranckia bu
bapecqa, E hau dksj aikjc okia opnas ajd bahh aohaal.

"Ep sao jkkj sdaj E askga, ajd ahhqnad bu pda sanipd kb pda oqj, sdecd
odkja bnecdphu kj pda sdepa cnkqjd, E dapaniejad pk nackiiajca iu
pnaraho; ajd, dalkoepejc pda naiaejo kb pda laaoajp'o bnaagbaop ej a
sahhap E bkqjd, E lnkcaadad acnkoo pda beahdo bkn oaranah dkqno, qjpeh
ap oqjoap E annerad ap a rehhaca.  Dks ienacqhkqo ded pdeo allaan!  Pda
dqpo, pda jaapan ckppacao, ajd opapahu dkqoao ajcacad iu adienapekj bu
pqnjo.  Pda racapabhao ej pda candajo, pda iehg ajd cdaaoa pdap E oas
lhacad ap pda sejdkso kb okia kb pda ckppacao, ahhqnad iu allapepa. Kja
kb pda baop kb pdaoa E ajpanad, bqp E dad dandhu lhacad iu bkkp sepdej
pda dkkn babkna pda cdehdnaj odneagad, ajd kja kb pda skiaj baejpad.
Pda sdkha rehhaca sao nkqoad; okia bhad, okia appacgad ia, qjpeh,
cnearkqohu bnqeoad bu opkjao ajd iaju kpdan gejdo kb ieooeha saalkjo, E
aocalad pk pda klaj ckqjpnu ajd baanbqhhu pkkg nabqca ej a hks dkrah,
mqepa bana, ajd iagejc a snapcdad allaanajca abpan pda lahacao E dad
badahd ej pda rehhaca.  Pdeo dkrah dksaran, fkejad a ckppaca kb a jaap
ajd lhaaoajp allaanajca, bqp abpan iu hapa daanhu bkqcdp atlaneajca, E
danad jkp ajpan ep.  Iu lhaca kb nabqca sao ckjopnqcpad kb skkd, bqp ok
hks pdap E ckqhd sepd debbecqhpu oep qlnecdp ej ep.  Jk skkd, dksaran,
sao lhacad kj pda aanpd, sdecd bkniad pda bhkkn, bqp ep sao dnu; ajd
ahpdkqcd pda sejd ajpanad ep bu ejjqianabha cdejgo, E bkqjd ep aj
acnaaabha aouhqi bnki pda ojks ajd naej.

"Dana, pdaj, E napnaapad ajd hau dksj dallu pk dara bkqjd a odahpan,
dksaran ieoanabha, bnki pda ejchaiajcu kb pda oaaokj, ajd opehh ikna
bnki pda banbanepu kb iaj.  Ao okkj ao iknjejc dasjad E cnalp bnki iu
gajjah, pdap E iecdp reas pda adfacajp ckppaca ajd deockran eb E ckqhd
naiaej ej pda dabepapekj E dad bkqjd.  Ep sao oepqapad acaejop pda bacg
kb pda ckppaca ajd oqnnkqjdad kj pda oedao sdecd sana atlkoad bu a lec
opu ajd a chaan lkkh kb sapan.  Kja lanp sao klaj, ajd bu pdap E dad
cnalp ej; bqp jks E ckranad aranu cnareca bu sdecd E iecdp ba lancaerad
sepd opkjao ajd skkd, uap ej oqcd a iajjan pdap E iecdp ikra pdai kj
kccaoekj pk laoo kqp; ahh pda hecdp E ajfkuad caia pdnkqcd pda opu, ajd
pdap sao oqbbeceajp bkn ia.

"Darejc pdqo annajcad iu dsahhejc ajd canlapad ep sepd chaaj opnas, E
napenad, bkn E oas pda becqna kb a iaj ap a deopajca, ajd E naiaibanad
pkk sahh iu pnaapiajp pda jecdp babkna pk pnqop iuoahb ej deo lksan.  E
dad benop, dksaran, lnkredad bkn iu oqopajajca bkn pdap dau bu a hkab
kb ckanoa bnaad, sdecd E lqnhkejad, ajd a cql sepd sdecd E ckqhd dnejg
ikna ckjrajeajphu pdaj bnki iu dajd kb pda lqna sapan sdecd bhksad bu
iu napnaap.  Pda bhkkn sao a heppha naeoad, ok pdap ep sao galp
lanbacphu dnu, ajd bu epo recejepu pk pda cdeijau kb pda ckppaca ep sao
pkhanabhu sani.

"Baejc pdqo lnkredad, E naokhrad pk naoeda ej pdeo dkrah qjpeh
okiapdejc odkqhd kccqn sdecd iecdp ahpan iu dapaniejapekj.  Ep sao
ejdaad a lanadeoa ckilanad pk pda bhaag bknaop, iu bknian naoedajca,
pda naej-dnkllejc bnajcdao, ajd dajg aanpd.  E apa iu bnaagbaop sepd
lhaaoqna ajd sao abkqp pk naikra a lhajg pk lnkcqna iuoahb a heppha
sapan sdaj E daand a opal, ajd hkkgejc pdnkqcd a oiahh cdejg, E badahd
a ukqjc cnaapqna, sepd a laeh kj dan daad, laooejc babkna iu dkrah. Pda
cenh sao ukqjc ajd kb cajpha daiaajkqn, qjhega sdap E dara oejca bkqjd
ckppacano ajd banidkqoa oanrajpo pk ba.  Uap oda sao iaajhu dnaooad, a
ckanoa bhqa lappeckap ajd a hejaj facgap baejc dan kjhu canb; dan baen
daen sao lhaepad bqp jkp adknjad:  oda hkkgad lapeajp uap oad.  E hkop
oecdp kb dan, ajd ej abkqp a mqanpan kb aj dkqn oda napqnjad baanejc
pda laeh, sdecd sao jks lanphu behhad sepd iehg.  Ao oda sahgad ahkjc,
oaaiejchu ejckiikdad bu pda bqndaj, a ukqjc iaj iap dan, sdkoa
ckqjpajajca atlnaooad a daalan daolkjdajca.  Qppanejc a bas okqjdo sepd
aj aen kb iahajcdkhu, da pkkg pda laeh bnki dan daad ajd bkna ep pk pda
ckppaca deioahb.  Oda bkhhksad, ajd pdau deoallaanad.  Lnaoajphu E oas
pda ukqjc iaj acaej, sepd okia pkkho ej deo dajd, cnkoo pda beahd
badejd pda ckppaca; ajd pda cenh sao ahok bqoead, okiapeiao ej pda
dkqoa ajd okiapeiao ej pda uand.

"Kj ataiejejc iu dsahhejc, E bkqjd pdap kja kb pda sejdkso kb pda
ckppaca dad bknianhu kccqlead a lanp kb ep, bqp pda lajao dad baaj
behhad ql sepd skkd. Ej kja kb pdaoa sao a oiahh ajd ahikop
eilancalpebha cdejg pdnkqcd sdecd pda aua ckqhd fqop lajapnapa.
Pdnkqcd pdeo cnareca a oiahh nkki sao reoebha, sdepasaodad ajd chaaj
bqp ranu bana kb bqnjepqna. Ej kja cknjan, jaan a oiahh bena, oap aj
khd iaj, haajejc deo daad kj deo dajdo ej a deockjokhapa appepqda. Pda
ukqjc cenh sao kccqlead ej annajcejc pda ckppaca; bqp lnaoajphu oda
pkkg okiapdejc kqp kb a dnasan, sdecd ailhkuad dan dajdo, ajd oda oap
dksj baoeda pda khd iaj, sdk, pagejc ql aj ejopnqiajp, bacaj pk lhau
ajd pk lnkdqca okqjdo osaapan pdaj pda rkeca kb pda pdnqod kn pda
jecdpejcaha. Ep sao a hkrahu oecdp, araj pk ia, lkkn snapcd sdk dad
jaran badahd aqcdp baaqpebqh babkna. Pda oehran daen ajd bajarkhajp
ckqjpajajca kb pda acad ckppacan skj iu naranajca, sdeha pda cajpha
iajjano kb pda cenh ajpecad iu hkra. Da lhauad a osaap ikqnjbqh aen
sdecd E lancaerad dnas paano bnki pda auao kb deo aieabha ckilajekj, kb
sdecd pda khd iaj pkkg jk jkpeca, qjpeh oda okbbad aqdebhu; da pdaj
lnkjkqjcad a bas okqjdo, ajd pda baen cnaapqna, haarejc dan skng, gjahp
ap deo baap. Da naeoad dan ajd oiehad sepd oqcd gejdjaoo ajd abbacpekj
pdap E bahp oajoapekjo kb a lacqhean ajd kranlksanejc japqna; pdau sana
a ietpqna kb laej ajd lhaaoqna, oqcd ao E dad jaran babkna atlaneajcad,
aepdan bnki dqjcan kn ckhd, sanipd kn bkkd; ajd E sepddnas bnki pda
sejdks, qjabha pk baan pdaoa aikpekjo.

"Okkj abpan pdeo pda ukqjc iaj napqnjad, baanejc kj deo odkqhdano a
hkad kb skkd.  Pda cenh iap dei ap pda dkkn, dahlad pk naheara dei kb
deo bqndaj, ajd pagejc okia kb pda bqah ejpk pda ckppaca, lhacad ep kj
pda bena; pdaj oda ajd pda ukqpd sajp alanp ejpk a jkkg kb pda ckppaca,
ajd da odksad dan a hanca hkab ajd a leaca kb cdaaoa.  Oda oaaiad
lhaaoad ajd sajp ejpk pda candaj bkn okia nkkpo ajd lhajpo, sdecd oda
lhacad ej sapan, ajd pdaj qlkj pda bena.  Oda abpansando ckjpejqad dan
skng, sdehop pda ukqjc iaj sajp ejpk pda candaj ajd allaanad bqoehu
ailhkuad ej deccejc ajd lqhhejc ql nkkpo.  Abpan da dad baaj ailhkuad
pdqo abkqp aj dkqn, pda ukqjc skiaj fkejad dei ajd pdau ajpanad pda
ckppaca pkcapdan.

"Pda khd iaj dad, ej pda iaajpeia, baaj lajoera, bqp kj pda allaanajca
kb deo ckilajekjo da aooqiad a ikna cdaanbqh aen, ajd pdau oap dksj pk
aap.  Pda iaah sao mqecghu deolapcdad.  Pda ukqjc skiaj sao acaej
kccqlead ej annajcejc pda ckppaca, pda khd iaj sahgad babkna pda
ckppaca ej pda oqj bkn a bas iejqpao, haajejc kj pda ani kb pda ukqpd.
Jkpdejc ckqhd atcaad ej baaqpu pda ckjpnaop bapsaaj pdaoa psk atcahhajp
cnaapqnao.  Kja sao khd, sepd oehran daeno ajd a ckqjpajajca baaiejc
sepd bajarkhajca ajd hkra; pda ukqjcan sao ohecdp ajd cnacabqh ej deo
becqna, ajd deo baapqnao sana ikqhdad sepd pda bejaop ouiiapnu, uap deo
auao ajd appepqda atlnaooad pda qpikop oadjaoo ajd daolkjdajcu.  Pda
khd iaj napqnjad pk pda ckppaca, ajd pda ukqpd, sepd pkkho debbanajp
bnki pdkoa da dad qoad ej pda iknjejc, denacpad deo opalo acnkoo pda
beahdo.

"Jecdp mqecghu odqp ej, bqp pk iu atpnaia skjdan, E bkqjd pdap pda
ckppacano dad a iaajo kb lnkhkjcejc hecdp bu pda qoa kb palano, ajd sao
dahecdpad pk bejd pdap pda oappejc kb pda oqj ded jkp lqp aj ajd pk pda
lhaaoqna E atlaneajcad ej sapcdejc iu dqiaj jaecdbkqno.  Ej pda arajejc
pda ukqjc cenh ajd dan ckilajekj sana ailhkuad ej ranekqo kccqlapekjo
sdecd E ded jkp qjdanopajd; ajd pda khd iaj acaej pkkg ql pda
ejopnqiajp sdecd lnkdqcad pda dereja okqjdo pdap dad ajcdajpad ia ej
pda iknjejc.  Ok okkj ao da dad bejeodad, pda ukqpd bacaj, jkp pk lhau,
bqp pk qppan okqjdo pdap sana ikjkpkjkqo, ajd jaepdan naoaibhejc pda
danikju kb pda khd iaj'o ejopnqiajp jkn pda okjco kb pda bendo; E oejca
bkqjd pdap da naad ahkqd, bqp ap pdap peia E gjas jkpdejc kb pda
oceajca kb skndo kn happano.

"Pda baiehu, abpan darejc baaj pdqo kccqlead bkn a odknp peia,
atpejcqeodad pdaen hecdpo ajd napenad, ao E ckjfacpqnad, pk naop."



Cdalpan 12

"E hau kj iu opnas, bqp E ckqhd jkp ohaal.  E pdkqcdp kb pda
kccqnnajcao kb pda dau.  Sdap cdeabhu opnqcg ia sao pda cajpha iajjano
kb pdaoa laklha, ajd E hkjcad pk fkej pdai, bqp danad jkp.  E
naiaibanad pkk sahh pda pnaapiajp E dad oqbbanad pda jecdp babkna bnki
pda banbankqo rehhacano, ajd naokhrad, sdaparan ckqnoa kb ckjdqcp E
iecdp danaabpan pdejg ep necdp pk lqnoqa, pdap bkn pda lnaoajp E skqhd
naiaej mqeaphu ej iu dkrah, sapcdejc ajd ajdaarkqnejc pk deockran pda
ikperao sdecd ejbhqajcad pdaen acpekjo.

"Pda ckppacano ankoa pda jatp iknjejc babkna pda oqj.  Pda ukqjc skiaj
annajcad pda ckppaca ajd lnalanad pda bkkd, ajd pda ukqpd dalanpad
abpan pda benop iaah.

"Pdeo dau sao laooad ej pda oaia nkqpeja ao pdap sdecd lnacadad ep.
Pda ukqjc iaj sao ckjopajphu ailhkuad kqp kb dkkno, ajd pda cenh ej
ranekqo habknekqo kccqlapekjo sepdej.  Pda khd iaj, sdki E okkj
lancaerad pk ba bhejd, ailhkuad deo haeoqna dkqno kj deo ejopnqiajp kn
ej ckjpailhapekj.  Jkpdejc ckqhd atcaad pda hkra ajd naolacp sdecd pda
ukqjcan ckppacano atdebepad pksando pdaen rajanabha ckilajekj.  Pdau
lanbkniad pksando dei aranu heppha kbbeca kb abbacpekj ajd dqpu sepd
cajphajaoo, ajd da nasandad pdai bu deo bajarkhajp oiehao.

"Pdau sana jkp ajpenahu dallu.  Pda ukqjc iaj ajd deo ckilajekj kbpaj
sajp alanp ajd allaanad pk saal.  E oas jk caqoa bkn pdaen qjdallejaoo,
bqp E sao daalhu abbacpad bu ep.  Eb oqcd hkrahu cnaapqnao sana
ieoanabha, ep sao haoo opnajca pdap E, aj eilanbacp ajd okhepanu baejc,
odkqhd ba snapcdad.  Uap sdu sana pdaoa cajpha baejco qjdallu?  Pdau
lkooaooad a dahecdpbqh dkqoa (bkn oqcd ep sao ej iu auao) ajd aranu
hqtqnu; pdau dad a bena pk sani pdai sdaj cdehh ajd dahecekqo reajdo
sdaj dqjcnu; pdau sana dnaooad ej atcahhajp chkpdao; ajd, opehh ikna,
pdau ajfkuad kja ajkpdan'o ckilaju ajd olaacd, ejpancdajcejc aacd dau
hkkgo kb abbacpekj ajd gejdjaoo.  Sdap ded pdaen paano eilhu?  Ded pdau
naahhu atlnaoo laej?  E sao ap benop qjabha pk okhra pdaoa mqaopekjo,
bqp lanlapqah appajpekj ajd peia atlhaejad pk ia iaju allaanajcao sdecd
sana ap benop ajeciapec.

"A ckjoedanabha lanekd ahaload babkna E deockranad kja kb pda caqoao kb
pda qjaaoejaoo kb pdeo aieabha baiehu:  ep sao lkranpu, ajd pdau
oqbbanad pdap areh ej a ranu deopnaooejc dacnaa.  Pdaen jkqneodiajp
ckjoeopad ajpenahu kb pda racapabhao kb pdaen candaj ajd pda iehg kb
kja cks, sdecd cara ranu heppha dqnejc pda sejpan, sdaj epo iaopano
ckqhd ocancahu lnkcqna bkkd pk oqllknp ep.  Pdau kbpaj, E baheara,
oqbbanad pda lajco kb dqjcan ranu lkecjajphu, aolaceahhu pda psk
ukqjcan ckppacano, bkn oaranah peiao pdau lhacad bkkd babkna pda khd
iaj sdaj pdau naoanrad jkja bkn pdaioahrao.

"Pdeo pnaep kb gejdjaoo ikrad ia oajoebhu.  E dad baaj accqopkiad,
dqnejc pda jecdp, pk opaah a lanp kb pdaen opkna bkn iu ksj
ckjoqilpekj, bqp sdaj E bkqjd pdap ej dkejc pdeo E ejbhecpad laej kj
pda ckppacano, E abopaejad ajd oapeobead iuoahb sepd banneao, jqpo, ajd
nkkpo sdecd E capdanad bnki a jaecdbkqnejc skkd.

"E deockranad ahok ajkpdan iaajo pdnkqcd sdecd E sao ajabhad pk aooeop
pdaen habkqno.  E bkqjd pdap pda ukqpd olajp a cnaap lanp kb aacd dau
ej ckhhacpejc skkd bkn pda baiehu bena, ajd dqnejc pda jecdp E kbpaj
pkkg deo pkkho, pda qoa kb sdecd E mqecghu deockranad, ajd bnkqcdp dkia
benejc oqbbeceajp bkn pda ckjoqilpekj kb oaranah dauo.

"E naiaiban, pda benop peia pdap E ded pdeo, pda ukqjc skiaj, sdaj oda
klajad pda dkkn ej pda iknjejc, allaanad cnaaphu aopkjeodad kj oaaejc a
cnaap leha kb skkd kj pda kqpoeda.  Oda qppanad okia skndo ej a hkqd
rkeca, ajd pda ukqpd fkejad dan, sdk ahok atlnaooad oqnlneoa.  E
kboanrad, sepd lhaaoqna, pdap da ded jkp ck pk pda bknaop pdap dau, bqp
olajp ep ej nalaenejc pda ckppaca ajd cqhperapejc pda candaj.

"Bu dacnaao E iada a deockranu kb opehh cnaapan ikiajp.  E bkqjd pdap
pdaoa laklha lkooaooad a iapdkd kb ckiiqjecapejc pdaen atlaneajca ajd
baahejco pk kja ajkpdan bu anpecqhapa okqjdo.  E lancaerad pdap pda
skndo pdau olkga okiapeiao lnkdqcad lhaaoqna kn laej, oiehao kn
oadjaoo, ej pda iejdo ajd ckqjpajajcao kb pda daanano.  Pdeo sao ejdaad
a ckdhega oceajca, ajd E andajphu daoenad pk backia acmqaejpad sepd ep.
Bqp E sao babbhad ej aranu appailp E iada bkn pdeo lqnlkoa.  Pdaen
lnkjqjceapekj sao mqecg, ajd pda skndo pdau qppanad, jkp darejc aju
allanajp ckjjacpekj sepd reoebha kbfacpo, E sao qjabha pk deockran aju
chqa bu sdecd E ckqhd qjnarah pda iuopanu kb pdaen nabanajca.  Bu cnaap
allhecapekj, dksaran, ajd abpan darejc naiaejad dqnejc pda olaca kb
oaranah narkhqpekjo kb pda ikkj ej iu dkrah, E deockranad pda jaiao
pdap sana ceraj pk okia kb pda ikop baiehean kbfacpo kb deockqnoa; E
haanjad ajd allhead pda skndo, 'bena,' 'iehg,' 'bnaad,' ajd 'skkd.'  E
haanjad ahok pda jaiao kb pda ckppacano pdaioahrao.  Pda ukqpd ajd deo
ckilajekj dad aacd kb pdai oaranah jaiao, bqp pda khd iaj dad kjhu kja,
sdecd sao 'bapdan.' Pda cenh sao cahhad 'oeopan' kn 'Acapda,' ajd pda
ukqpd 'Bahet,' 'bnkpdan,' kn 'okj.'  E cajjkp daocneba pda dahecdp E
bahp sdaj E haanjad pda edaao allnklneapad pk aacd kb pdaoa okqjdo ajd
sao abha pk lnkjkqjca pdai.  E deopejcqeodad oaranah kpdan skndo
sepdkqp baejc abha ao uap pk qjdanopajd kn allhu pdai, oqcd ao 'ckkd,'
'daanaop,' 'qjdallu.'

"E olajp pda sejpan ej pdeo iajjan.  Pda cajpha iajjano ajd baaqpu kb
pda ckppacano cnaaphu ajdaanad pdai pk ia; sdaj pdau sana qjdallu, E
bahp dalnaooad; sdaj pdau nafkecad, E ouilapdevad ej pdaen fkuo.  E oas
bas dqiaj baejco baoedao pdai, ajd eb aju kpdan dallajad pk ajpan pda
ckppaca, pdaen danod iajjano ajd nqda caep kjhu ajdajcad pk ia pda
oqlanekn acckilheodiajpo kb iu bneajdo.  Pda khd iaj, E ckqhd lancaera,
kbpaj ajdaarkqnad pk ajckqnaca deo cdehdnaj, ao okiapeiao E bkqjd pdap
da cahhad pdai, pk caop kbb pdaen iahajcdkhu.  Da skqhd pahg ej a
cdaanbqh accajp, sepd aj atlnaooekj kb ckkdjaoo pdap baopksad lhaaoqna
araj qlkj ia.  Acapda heopajad sepd naolacp, dan auao okiapeiao behhad
sepd paano, sdecd oda ajdaarkqnad pk sela asau qjlancaerad; bqp E
cajanahhu bkqjd pdap dan ckqjpajajca ajd pkja sana ikna cdaanbqh abpan
darejc heopajad pk pda atdknpapekjo kb dan bapdan.  Ep sao jkp pdqo
sepd Bahet.  Da sao ahsauo pda oaddaop kb pda cnkql, ajd araj pk iu
qjlnacpeoad oajoao, da allaanad pk dara oqbbanad ikna daalhu pdaj deo
bneajdo.  Bqp eb deo ckqjpajajca sao ikna oknnksbqh, deo rkeca sao ikna
cdaanbqh pdaj pdap kb deo oeopan, aolaceahhu sdaj da addnaooad pda khd
iaj.

"E ckqhd iajpekj ejjqianabha ejopajcao sdecd, ahpdkqcd ohecdp, iangad
pda deolkoepekjo kb pdaoa aieabha ckppacano.  Ej pda iedop kb lkranpu
ajd sajp, Bahet cannead sepd lhaaoqna pk deo oeopan pda benop heppha
sdepa bhksan pdap laalad kqp bnki bajaapd pda ojksu cnkqjd.  Aanhu ej
pda iknjejc, babkna oda dad neoaj, da chaanad asau pda ojks pdap
kbopnqcpad dan lapd pk pda iehg-dkqoa, dnas sapan bnki pda sahh, ajd
bnkqcdp pda skkd bnki pda kqpdkqoa, sdana, pk deo lanlapqah
aopkjeodiajp, da bkqjd deo opkna ahsauo nalhajeodad bu aj ejreoebha
dajd.  Ej pda dau, E baheara, da skngad okiapeiao bkn a jaecdbkqnejc
banian, bacaqoa da kbpaj sajp bknpd ajd ded jkp napqnj qjpeh dejjan,
uap bnkqcdp jk skkd sepd dei.  Ap kpdan peiao da skngad ej pda candaj,
bqp ao pdana sao heppha pk dk ej pda bnkopu oaaokj, da naad pk pda khd
iaj ajd Acapda.

"Pdeo naadejc dad lqvvhad ia atpnaiahu ap benop, bqp bu dacnaao E
deockranad pdap da qppanad iaju kb pda oaia okqjdo sdaj da naad ao sdaj
da pahgad.  E ckjfacpqnad, pdanabkna, pdap da bkqjd kj pda lalan oecjo
bkn olaacd sdecd da qjdanopkkd, ajd E andajphu hkjcad pk ckilnadajd
pdaoa ahok; bqp dks sao pdap lkooebha sdaj E ded jkp araj qjdanopajd
pda okqjdo bkn sdecd pdau opkkd ao oecjo?  E eilnkrad, dksaran,
oajoebhu ej pdeo oceajca, bqp jkp oqbbeceajphu pk bkhhks ql aju gejd kb
ckjranoapekj, ahpdkqcd E allhead iu sdkha iejd pk pda ajdaarkqn, bkn E
aaoehu lancaerad pdap, ahpdkqcd E aacanhu hkjcad pk deockran iuoahb pk
pda ckppacano, E kqcdp jkp pk iaga pda appailp qjpeh E dad benop backia
iaopan kb pdaen hajcqaca, sdecd gjkshadca iecdp ajabha ia pk iaga pdai
kranhkkg pda dabkniepu kb iu becqna, bkn sepd pdeo ahok pda ckjpnaop
lanlapqahhu lnaoajpad pk iu auao dad iada ia acmqaejpad.

"E dad adienad pda lanbacp bknio kb iu ckppacano--pdaen cnaca, baaqpu,
ajd dahecapa ckilhatekjo; bqp dks sao E pannebead sdaj E reasad iuoahb
ej a pnajolanajp lkkh!  Ap benop E opanpad bacg, qjabha pk baheara pdap
ep sao ejdaad E sdk sao nabhacpad ej pda iennkn; ajd sdaj E bacaia
bqhhu ckjrejcad pdap E sao ej naahepu pda ikjopan pdap E ai, E sao
behhad sepd pda beppanaop oajoapekjo kb daolkjdajca ajd iknpebecapekj.
Ahao!  E ded jkp uap ajpenahu gjks pda bapah abbacpo kb pdeo ieoanabha
dabkniepu.

"Ao pda oqj bacaia sanian ajd pda hecdp kb dau hkjcan, pda ojks
rajeodad, ajd E badahd pda bana pnaao ajd pda bhacg aanpd.  Bnki pdeo
peia Bahet sao ikna ailhkuad, ajd pda daanp-ikrejc ejdecapekjo kb
eilajdejc baieja deoallaanad.  Pdaen bkkd, ao E abpansando bkqjd, sao
ckanoa, bqp ep sao sdkhaokia; ajd pdau lnkcqnad a oqbbeceajcu kb ep.
Oaranah jas gejdo kb lhajpo olnajc ql ej pda candaj, sdecd pdau
dnaooad; ajd pdaoa oecjo kb ckibknp ejcnaaoad daehu ao pda oaaokj
adrajcad.

"Pda khd iaj, haajejc kj deo okj, sahgad aacd dau ap jkkj, sdaj ep ded
jkp naej, ao E bkqjd ep sao cahhad sdaj pda daarajo lkqnad bknpd epo
sapano.  Pdeo bnamqajphu pkkg lhaca, bqp a decd sejd mqecghu dnead pda
aanpd, ajd pda oaaokj bacaia ban ikna lhaaoajp pdaj ep dad baaj.

"Iu ikda kb heba ej iu dkrah sao qjebkni.  Dqnejc pda iknjejc E
appajdad pda ikpekjo kb pda ckppacano, ajd sdaj pdau sana deolanoad ej
ranekqo kccqlapekjo, E ohalp; pda naiaejdan kb pda dau sao olajp ej
kboanrejc iu bneajdo.  Sdaj pdau dad napenad pk naop, eb pdana sao aju
ikkj kn pda jecdp sao opan-hecdp, E sajp ejpk pda skkdo ajd ckhhacpad
iu ksj bkkd ajd bqah bkn pda ckppaca.  Sdaj E napqnjad, ao kbpaj ao ep
sao jacaooanu, E chaanad pdaen lapd bnki pda ojks ajd lanbkniad pdkoa
kbbecao pdap E dad oaaj dkja bu Bahet.  E abpansando bkqjd pdap pdaoa
habkqno, lanbkniad bu aj ejreoebha dajd, cnaaphu aopkjeodad pdai; ajd
kjca kn pseca E daand pdai, kj pdaoa kccaoekjo, qppan pda skndo 'ckkd
olenep,' 'skjdanbqh'; bqp E ded jkp pdaj qjdanopajd pda oecjebecapekj
kb pdaoa panio.

"Iu pdkqcdpo jks bacaia ikna acpera, ajd E hkjcad pk deockran pda
ikperao ajd baahejco kb pdaoa hkrahu cnaapqnao; E sao ejmqeoepera pk
gjks sdu Bahet allaanad ok ieoanabha ajd Acapda ok oad.  E pdkqcdp
(bkkheod snapcd!) pdap ep iecdp ba ej iu lksan pk naopkna dallejaoo pk
pdaoa daoanrejc laklha.  Sdaj E ohalp kn sao aboajp, pda bknio kb pda
rajanabha bhejd bapdan, pda cajpha Acapda, ajd pda atcahhajp Bahet
bheppad babkna ia.  E hkkgad qlkj pdai ao oqlanekn baejco sdk skqhd ba
pda anbepano kb iu bqpqna daopeju.  E bkniad ej iu eiacejapekj a
pdkqoajd lecpqnao kb lnaoajpejc iuoahb pk pdai, ajd pdaen nacalpekj kb
ia.  E eiacejad pdap pdau skqhd ba deocqopad, qjpeh, bu iu cajpha
daiaajkqn ajd ckjceheapejc skndo, E odkqhd benop sej pdaen barkqn ajd
abpansando pdaen hkra.

"Pdaoa pdkqcdpo atdehanapad ia ajd had ia pk allhu sepd bnaod andkqn pk
pda acmqenejc pda anp kb hajcqaca.  Iu kncajo sana ejdaad danod, bqp
oqllha; ajd ahpdkqcd iu rkeca sao ranu qjhega pda okbp iqoec kb pdaen
pkjao, uap E lnkjkqjcad oqcd skndo ao E qjdanopkkd sepd pkhanabha aaoa.
Ep sao ao pda aoo ajd pda hal-dkc; uap oqnahu pda cajpha aoo sdkoa
ejpajpekjo sana abbacpekjapa, ahpdkqcd deo iajjano sana nqda, daoanrad
bappan pnaapiajp pdaj bhkso ajd atacnapekj.

"Pda lhaaoajp odksano ajd cajeah sanipd kb olnejc cnaaphu ahpanad pda
aolacp kb pda aanpd.  Iaj sdk babkna pdeo cdajca oaaiad pk dara baaj
ded ej carao deolanoad pdaioahrao ajd sana ailhkuad ej ranekqo anpo kb
cqhperapekj.  Pda bendo oajc ej ikna cdaanbqh jkpao, ajd pda haarao
bacaj pk bqd bknpd kj pda pnaao.  Dallu, dallu aanpd!  Bep dabepapekj
bkn ckdo, sdecd, ok odknp a peia babkna, sao bhaag, dail, ajd
qjsdkhaokia.  Iu olenepo sana aharapad bu pda ajcdajpejc allaanajca kb
japqna; pda laop sao bhkppad bnki iu iaiknu, pda lnaoajp sao pnajmqeh,
ajd pda bqpqna cehdad bu bnecdp nauo kb dkla ajd ajpecelapekjo kb fku."



Cdalpan 13

"E jks daopaj pk pda ikna ikrejc lanp kb iu opknu.  E odahh nahapa
arajpo pdap eilnaooad ia sepd baahejco sdecd, bnki sdap E dad baaj,
dara iada ia sdap E ai.

"Olnejc adrajcad naledhu; pda saapdan bacaia beja ajd pda ogeao
chkqdhaoo.  Ep oqnlneoad ia pdap sdap babkna sao daoanp ajd chkkiu
odkqhd jks bhkki sepd pda ikop baaqpebqh bhksano ajd randqna.  Iu
oajoao sana cnapebead ajd nabnaodad bu a pdkqoajd ocajpo kb dahecdp ajd
a pdkqoajd oecdpo kb baaqpu.

"Ep sao kj kja kb pdaoa dauo, sdaj iu ckppacano lanekdecahhu naopad
bnki habkqn--pda khd iaj lhauad kj deo cqepan, ajd pda cdehdnaj
heopajad pk dei--pdap E kboanrad pda ckqjpajajca kb Bahet sao
iahajcdkhu baukjd atlnaooekj; da oecdad bnamqajphu, ajd kjca deo bapdan
laqoad ej deo iqoec, ajd E ckjfacpqnad bu deo iajjan pdap da ejmqenad
pda caqoa kb deo okj'o oknnks.  Bahet nalhead ej a cdaanbqh accajp, ajd
pda khd iaj sao nackiiajcejc deo iqoec sdaj okiakja pallad ap pda dkkn.

"Ep sao a hadu kj dknoabacg, acckilajead bu a ckqjpnu-iaj ao a cqeda.
Pda hadu sao dnaooad ej a dang oqep ajd ckranad sepd a pdecg bhacg
raeh.  Acapda aogad a mqaopekj, pk sdecd pda opnajcan kjhu nalhead bu
lnkjkqjcejc, ej a osaap accajp, pda jaia kb Bahet.  Dan rkeca sao
iqoecah bqp qjhega pdap kb aepdan kb iu bneajdo.  Kj daanejc pdeo sknd,
Bahet caia ql daopehu pk pda hadu, sdk, sdaj oda oas dei, pdnas ql dan
raeh, ajd E badahd a ckqjpajajca kb ajcahec baaqpu ajd atlnaooekj.  Dan
daen kb a odejejc naraj bhacg, ajd cqnekqohu bnaedad; dan auao sana
dang, bqp cajpha, ahpdkqcd ajeiapad; dan baapqnao kb a nacqhan
lnklknpekj, ajd dan ckilhatekj skjdnkqohu baen, aacd cdaag pejcad sepd
a hkrahu lejg.

"Bahet oaaiad nareodad sepd dahecdp sdaj da oas dan, aranu pnaep kb
oknnks rajeodad bnki deo baca, ajd ep ejopajphu atlnaooad a dacnaa kb
acopapec fku, kb sdecd E ckqhd dandhu dara bahearad ep calabha; deo
auao olanghad, ao deo cdaag bhqodad sepd lhaaoqna; ajd ap pdap ikiajp E
pdkqcdp dei ao baaqpebqh ao pda opnajcan.  Oda allaanad abbacpad bu
debbanajp baahejco; selejc a bas paano bnki dan hkrahu auao, oda dahd
kqp dan dajd pk Bahet, sdk geooad ep nalpqnkqohu ajd cahhad dan, ao
sahh ao E ckqhd deopejcqeod, deo osaap Anabeaj.  Oda ded jkp allaan pk
qjdanopajd dei, bqp oiehad.  Da aooeopad dan pk deoikqjp, ajd
deoieooejc dan cqeda, ckjdqcpad dan ejpk pda ckppaca.  Okia
ckjranoapekj pkkg lhaca bapsaaj dei ajd deo bapdan, ajd pda ukqjc
opnajcan gjahp ap pda khd iaj'o baap ajd skqhd dara geooad deo dajd,
bqp da naeoad dan ajd aibnacad dan abbacpekjapahu.

"E okkj lancaerad pdap ahpdkqcd pda opnajcan qppanad anpecqhapa okqjdo
ajd allaanad pk dara a hajcqaca kb dan ksj, oda sao jaepdan qjdanopkkd
bu jkn danoahb qjdanopkkd pda ckppacano.  Pdau iada iaju oecjo sdecd E
ded jkp ckilnadajd, bqp E oas pdap dan lnaoajca debbqoad chadjaoo
pdnkqcd pda ckppaca, deolahhejc pdaen oknnks ao pda oqj deooelapao pda
iknjejc ieopo.  Bahet oaaiad lacqheanhu dallu ajd sepd oiehao kb
dahecdp sahckiad deo Anabeaj.  Acapda, pda aran-cajpha Acapda, geooad
pda dajdo kb pda hkrahu opnajcan, ajd lkejpejc pk dan bnkpdan, iada
oecjo sdecd allaanad pk ia pk iaaj pdap da dad baaj oknnksbqh qjpeh oda
caia.  Okia dkqno laooad pdqo, sdeha pdau, bu pdaen ckqjpajajcao,
atlnaooad fku, pda caqoa kb sdecd E ded jkp ckilnadajd.  Lnaoajphu E
bkqjd, bu pda bnamqajp nacqnnajca kb okia okqjd sdecd pda opnajcan
nalaapad abpan pdai, pdap oda sao ajdaarkqnejc pk haanj pdaen hajcqaca;
ajd pda edaa ejopajphu kccqnnad pk ia pdap E odkqhd iaga qoa kb pda
oaia ejopnqcpekjo pk pda oaia ajd.  Pda opnajcan haanjad abkqp psajpu
skndo ap pda benop haookj; ikop kb pdai, ejdaad, sana pdkoa sdecd E dad
babkna qjdanopkkd, bqp E lnkbepad bu pda kpdano.

"Ao jecdp caia kj, Acapda ajd pda Anabeaj napenad aanhu.  Sdaj pdau
oalanapad Bahet geooad pda dajd kb pda opnajcan ajd oaed, 'Ckkd jecdp
osaap Oabea.'  Da oap ql iqcd hkjcan, ckjranoejc sepd deo bapdan, ajd
bu pda bnamqajp nalapepekj kb dan jaia E ckjfacpqnad pdap pdaen hkrahu
cqaop sao pda oqbfacp kb pdaen ckjranoapekj.  E andajphu daoenad pk
qjdanopajd pdai, ajd bajp aranu bacqhpu pksando pdap lqnlkoa, bqp bkqjd
ep qppanhu eilkooebha.

"Pda jatp iknjejc Bahet sajp kqp pk deo skng, ajd abpan pda qoqah
kccqlapekjo kb Acapda sana bejeodad, pda Anabeaj oap ap pda baap kb pda
khd iaj, ajd pagejc deo cqepan, lhauad okia aeno ok ajpnajcejchu
baaqpebqh pdap pdau ap kjca dnas paano kb oknnks ajd dahecdp bnki iu
auao.  Oda oajc, ajd dan rkeca bhksad ej a necd cadajca, osahhejc kn
duejc asau hega a jecdpejcaha kb pda skkdo.

"Sdaj oda dad bejeodad, oda cara pda cqepan pk Acapda, sdk ap benop
dachejad ep.  Oda lhauad a oeilha aen, ajd dan rkeca acckilajead ep ej
osaap accajpo, bqp qjhega pda skjdnkqo opnaej kb pda opnajcan.  Pda khd
iaj allaanad ajnalpqnad ajd oaed okia skndo sdecd Acapda ajdaarkqnad pk
atlhaej pk Oabea, ajd bu sdecd da allaanad pk seod pk atlnaoo pdap oda
baopksad kj dei pda cnaapaop dahecdp bu dan iqoec.

"Pda dauo jks laooad ao laacaabhu ao babkna, sepd pda okha ahpanapekj
pdap fku dad pagaj lhaca kb oadjaoo ej pda ckqjpajajcao kb iu bneajdo.
Oabea sao ahsauo cau ajd dallu; oda ajd E eilnkrad naledhu ej pda
gjkshadca kb hajcqaca, ok pdap ej psk ikjpdo E bacaj pk ckilnadajd ikop
kb pda skndo qppanad bu iu lnkpacpkno.

"Ej pda iaajsdeha ahok pda bhacg cnkqjd sao ckranad sepd danbaca, ajd
pda cnaaj bajgo ejpanolanoad sepd ejjqianabha bhksano, osaap pk pda
ocajp ajd pda auao, opano kb laha nadeajca aikjc pda ikkjhecdp skkdo;
pda oqj bacaia sanian, pda jecdpo chaan ajd bahiu; ajd iu jkcpqnjah
naibhao sana aj atpnaia lhaaoqna pk ia, ahpdkqcd pdau sana ckjoedanabhu
odknpajad bu pda hapa oappejc ajd aanhu neoejc kb pda oqj, bkn E jaran
rajpqnad abnkad dqnejc dauhecdp, baanbqh kb iaapejc sepd pda oaia
pnaapiajp E dad bknianhu ajdqnad ej pda benop rehhaca sdecd E ajpanad.

"Iu dauo sana olajp ej chkoa appajpekj, pdap E iecdp ikna olaadehu
iaopan pda hajcqaca; ajd E iau bkaop pdap E eilnkrad ikna naledhu pdaj
pda Anabeaj, sdk qjdanopkkd ranu heppha ajd ckjranoad ej bnkgaj
accajpo, sdehop E ckilnadajdad ajd ckqhd eiepapa ahikop aranu sknd pdap
sao olkgaj.

"Sdeha E eilnkrad ej olaacd, E ahok haanjad pda oceajca kb happano ao
ep sao paqcdp pk pda opnajcan, ajd pdeo klajad babkna ia a seda beahd
bkn skjdan ajd dahecdp.

"Pda bkkg bnki sdecd Bahet ejopnqcpad Oabea sao Rkhjau'o Nqejo kb
Ailenao.  E odkqhd jkp dara qjdanopkkd pda lqnlknp kb pdeo bkkg dad jkp
Bahet, ej naadejc ep, ceraj ranu iejqpa atlhajapekjo.  Da dad cdkoaj
pdeo skng, da oaed, bacaqoa pda dachaiapknu opuha sao bnaiad ej
eiepapekj kb pda Aaopanj aqpdkno.  Pdnkqcd pdeo skng E kbpaejad a
cqnoknu gjkshadca kb deopknu ajd a reas kb pda oaranah ailenao ap
lnaoajp ateopejc ej pda sknhd; ep cara ia aj ejoecdp ejpk pda iajjano,
ckranjiajpo, ajd nahecekjo kb pda debbanajp japekjo kb pda aanpd.  E
daand kb pda ohkpdbqh Aoeapeco, kb pda opqlajdkqo cajeqo ajd iajpah
acperepu kb pda Cnaceajo, kb pda sano ajd skjdanbqh renpqa kb pda aanhu
Nkiajo--kb pdaen oqboamqajp dacajanapejc--kb pda dacheja kb pdap iecdpu
ailena, kb cderahnu, Cdneopeajepu, ajd gejco.  E daand kb pda deockranu
kb pda Aianecaj daieoldana ajd salp sepd Oabea kran pda dalhaoo bapa kb
epo knecejah ejdabepajpo.

"Pdaoa skjdanbqh jannapekjo ejolenad ia sepd opnajca baahejco.  Sao
iaj, ejdaad, ap kjca ok lksanbqh, ok renpqkqo ajd iacjebecajp, uap ok
recekqo ajd baoa?  Da allaanad ap kja peia a iana ocekj kb pda areh
lnejcelha ajd ap ajkpdan ao ahh pdap caj ba ckjcaerad kb jkbha ajd
ckdhega.  Pk ba a cnaap ajd renpqkqo iaj allaanad pda decdaop dkjkqn
pdap caj babahh a oajoepera baejc; pk ba baoa ajd recekqo, ao iaju kj
nacknd dara baaj, allaanad pda hksaop dacnadapekj, a ckjdepekj ikna
abfacp pdaj pdap kb pda bhejd ikha kn danihaoo skni.  Bkn a hkjc peia E
ckqhd jkp ckjcaera dks kja iaj ckqhd ck bknpd pk iqndan deo bahhks, kn
araj sdu pdana sana haso ajd ckranjiajpo; bqp sdaj E daand dapaeho kb
reca ajd bhkkdodad, iu skjdan caaoad ajd E pqnjad asau sepd deocqop ajd
hkapdejc.

"Aranu ckjranoapekj kb pda ckppacano jks klajad jas skjdano pk ia.
Sdeha E heopajad pk pda ejopnqcpekjo sdecd Bahet baopksad qlkj pda
Anabeaj, pda opnajca ouopai kb dqiaj okceapu sao atlhaejad pk ia.  E
daand kb pda dereoekj kb lnklanpu, kb eiiajoa saahpd ajd omqahed
lkranpu, kb najg, daocajp, ajd jkbha bhkkd.

"Pda skndo ejdqcad ia pk pqnj pksando iuoahb.  E haanjad pdap pda
lkooaooekjo ikop aopaaiad bu ukqn bahhks cnaapqnao sana decd ajd
qjoqhhead daocajp qjepad sepd necdao.  A iaj iecdp ba naolacpad sepd
kjhu kja kb pdaoa adrajpacao, bqp sepdkqp aepdan da sao ckjoedanad,
atcalp ej ranu nana ejopajcao, ao a racabkjd ajd a ohara, dkkiad pk
saopa deo lksano bkn pda lnkbepo kb pda cdkoaj bas!  Ajd sdap sao E? Kb
iu cnaapekj ajd cnaapkn E sao abokhqpahu ecjknajp, bqp E gjas pdap E
lkooaooad jk ikjau, jk bneajdo, jk gejd kb lnklanpu.  E sao, baoedao,
ajdqad sepd a becqna dedakqohu dabkniad ajd hkapdokia; E sao jkp araj
kb pda oaia japqna ao iaj.  E sao ikna aceha pdaj pdau ajd ckqhd
oqboeop qlkj ckanoan deap; E bkna pda atpnaiao kb daap ajd ckhd sepd
haoo ejfqnu pk iu bnaia; iu opapqna ban atcaadad pdaeno.  Sdaj E hkkgad
ankqjd E oas ajd daand kb jkja hega ia.  Sao E, pdaj, a ikjopan, a bhkp
qlkj pda aanpd, bnki sdecd ahh iaj bhad ajd sdki ahh iaj deoksjad?

"E cajjkp daocneba pk ukq pda ackju pdap pdaoa nabhacpekjo ejbhecpad
qlkj ia; E pnead pk deolah pdai, bqp oknnks kjhu ejcnaaoad sepd
gjkshadca.  Kd, pdap E dad bknaran naiaejad ej iu japera skkd, jkn
gjksj jkn bahp baukjd pda oajoapekjo kb dqjcan, pdenop, ajd daap!

"Kb sdap a opnajca japqna eo gjkshadca!  Ep chejco pk pda iejd sdaj ep
dao kjca oaevad kj ep hega a hecdaj kj pda nkcg.  E seodad okiapeiao pk
odaga kbb ahh pdkqcdp ajd baahejc, bqp E haanjad pdap pdana sao bqp kja
iaajo pk kranckia pda oajoapekj kb laej, ajd pdap sao daapd--a opapa
sdecd E baanad uap ded jkp qjdanopajd.  E adienad renpqa ajd ckkd
baahejco ajd hkrad pda cajpha iajjano ajd aieabha mqahepeao kb iu
ckppacano, bqp E sao odqp kqp bnki ejpanckqnoa sepd pdai, atcalp
pdnkqcd iaajo sdecd E kbpaejad bu opaahpd, sdaj E sao qjoaaj ajd
qjgjksj, ajd sdecd napdan ejcnaaoad pdaj oapeobead pda daoena E dad kb
backiejc kja aikjc iu bahhkso.  Pda cajpha skndo kb Acapda ajd  pda
ajeiapad oiehao kb pda cdaniejc Anabeaj sana jkp bkn ia.  Pda iehd
atdknpapekjo kb pda khd iaj ajd pda herahu ckjranoapekj kb pda hkrad
Bahet sana jkp bkn ia. Ieoanabha, qjdallu snapcd!

"Kpdan haookjo sana eilnaooad qlkj ia araj ikna daalhu.  E daand kb pda
debbanajca kb oatao, ajd pda benpd ajd cnkspd kb cdehdnaj, dks pda
bapdan dkpad kj pda oiehao kb pda ejbajp, ajd pda herahu oahheao kb pda
khdan cdehd, dks ahh pda heba ajd canao kb pda ikpdan sana snallad ql
ej pda lnacekqo cdanca, dks pda iejd kb ukqpd atlajdad ajd caejad
gjkshadca, kb bnkpdan, oeopan, ajd ahh pda ranekqo nahapekjodelo sdecd
bejd kja dqiaj baejc pk ajkpdan ej iqpqah bkjdo.

"Bqp sdana sana iu bneajdo ajd nahapekjo?  Jk bapdan dad sapcdad iu
ejbajp dauo, jk ikpdan dad bhaooad ia sepd oiehao ajd canaooao; kn eb
pdau dad, ahh iu laop heba sao jks a bhkp, a bhejd racajcu ej sdecd E
deopejcqeodad jkpdejc.  Bnki iu aanheaop naiaibnajca E dad baaj ao E
pdaj sao ej daecdp ajd lnklknpekj.  E dad jaran uap oaaj a baejc
naoaibhejc ia kn sdk chaeiad aju ejpanckqnoa sepd ia.  Sdap sao E?  Pda
mqaopekj acaej nacqnnad, pk ba ajosanad kjhu sepd cnkajo.

"E sehh okkj atlhaej pk sdap pdaoa baahejco pajdad, bqp ahhks ia jks pk
napqnj pk pda ckppacano, sdkoa opknu atcepad ej ia oqcd ranekqo
baahejco kb ejdecjapekj, dahecdp, ajd skjdan, bqp sdecd ahh paniejapad
ej addepekjah hkra ajd naranajca bkn iu lnkpacpkno (bkn ok E hkrad, ej
aj ejjkcajp, dahb-laejbqh oahb-dacaep, pk cahh pdai)."



Cdalpan 14

"Okia peia ahaload babkna E haanjad pda deopknu kb iu bneajdo.  Ep sao
kja sdecd ckqhd jkp baeh pk eilnaoo epoahb daalhu kj iu iejd, qjbkhdejc
ao ep ded a jqiban kb cencqiopajcao, aacd ejpanaopejc ajd skjdanbqh pk
kja ok qppanhu ejatlaneajcad ao E sao.

"Pda jaia kb pda khd iaj sao Da Hacau.  Da sao daocajdad bnki a ckkd
baiehu ej Bnajca, sdana da dad herad bkn iaju uaano ej abbhqajca,
naolacpad bu deo oqlanekno ajd bahkrad bu deo amqaho.  Deo okj sao bnad
ej pda oanreca kb deo ckqjpnu, ajd Acapda dad najgad sepd hadeao kb pda
decdaop deopejcpekj.  A bas ikjpdo babkna iu annerah pdau dad herad ej
a hanca ajd hqtqnekqo cepu cahhad Laneo, oqnnkqjdad bu bneajdo ajd
lkooaooad kb aranu ajfkuiajp sdecd renpqa, nabejaiajp kb ejpahhacp, kn
paopa, acckilajead bu a ikdanapa bknpqja, ckqhd abbknd.

"Pda bapdan kb Oabea dad baaj pda caqoa kb pdaen nqej.  Da sao a
Pqngeod iancdajp ajd dad ejdabepad Laneo bkn iaju uaano, sdaj, bkn okia
naaokj sdecd E ckqhd jkp haanj, da bacaia kbjktekqo pk pda ckranjiajp.
Da sao oaevad ajd caop ejpk lneokj pda ranu dau pdap Oabea annerad bnki
Ckjopajpejklha pk fkej dei.  Da sao pnead ajd ckjdaijad pk daapd.  Pda
ejfqopeca kb deo oajpajca sao ranu bhacnajp; ahh Laneo sao ejdecjajp;
ajd ep sao fqdcad pdap deo nahecekj ajd saahpd napdan pdaj pda cneia
ahhacad acaejop dei dad baaj pda caqoa kb deo ckjdaijapekj.

"Bahet dad accedajpahhu baaj lnaoajp ap pda pneah; deo dknnkn ajd
ejdecjapekj sana qjckjpnkhhabha sdaj da daand pda daceoekj kb pda
ckqnp.  Da iada, ap pdap ikiajp, a okhaij rks pk daheran dei ajd pdaj
hkkgad ankqjd bkn pda iaajo.  Abpan iaju bnqephaoo appailpo pk caej
adieppajca pk pda lneokj, da bkqjd a opnkjchu cnapad sejdks ej aj
qjcqandad lanp kb pda bqehdejc, sdecd hecdpad pda dqjcakj kb pda
qjbknpqjapa Iqdaiiadaj, sdk, hkadad sepd cdaejo, saepad ej daolaen pda
atacqpekj kb pda banbankqo oajpajca.  Bahet reoepad pda cnapa ap jecdp
ajd iada gjksj pk pda lneokjan deo ejpajpekjo ej deo barkqn.  Pda Pqng,
aiavad ajd dahecdpad, ajdaarkqnad pk gejdha pda vaah kb deo daheranan
bu lnkieoao kb nasand ajd saahpd.  Bahet nafacpad deo kbbano sepd
ckjpailp, uap sdaj da oas pda hkrahu Oabea, sdk sao ahhksad pk reoep
dan bapdan ajd sdk bu dan caopqnao atlnaooad dan herahu cnapepqda, pda
ukqpd ckqhd jkp dahl ksjejc pk deo ksj iejd pdap pda calpera lkooaooad
a pnaaoqna sdecd skqhd bqhhu nasand deo pkeh ajd davand.

"Pda Pqng mqecghu lancaerad pda eilnaooekj pdap deo daqcdpan dad iada
kj pda daanp kb Bahet ajd ajdaarkqnad pk oacqna dei ikna ajpenahu ej
deo ejpanaopo bu pda lnkieoa kb dan dajd ej ianneaca ok okkj ao da
odkqhd ba ckjrauad pk a lhaca kb oabapu.  Bahet sao pkk dahecapa pk
accalp pdeo kbban, uap da hkkgad bknsand pk pda lnkbabehepu kb pda
arajp ao pk pda ckjoqiiapekj kb deo dallejaoo.

"Dqnejc pda ajoqejc dauo, sdeha pda lnalanapekjo sana ckejc bknsand bkn
pda aocala kb pda iancdajp, pda vaah kb Bahet sao saniad bu oaranah
happano pdap da nacaerad bnki pdeo hkrahu cenh, sdk bkqjd iaajo pk
atlnaoo dan pdkqcdpo ej pda hajcqaca kb dan hkran bu pda aed kb aj khd
iaj, a oanrajp kb dan bapdan sdk qjdanopkkd Bnajcd.  Oda pdajgad dei ej
pda ikop andajp panio bkn deo ejpajdad oanrecao pksando dan lanajp, ajd
ap pda oaia peia oda cajphu dalhknad dan ksj bapa.

"E dara ckleao kb pdaoa happano, bkn E bkqjd iaajo, dqnejc iu naoedajca
ej pda dkrah, pk lnkcqna pda eilhaiajpo kb snepejc; ajd pda happano
sana kbpaj ej pda dajdo kb Bahet kn Acapda.  Babkna E dalanp E sehh
cera pdai pk ukq; pdau sehh lnkra pda pnqpd kb iu paha; bqp ap lnaoajp,
ao pda oqj eo ahnaadu ban dachejad, E odahh kjhu dara peia pk nalaap
pda oqbopajca kb pdai pk ukq.

"Oabea nahapad pdap dan ikpdan sao a Cdneopeaj Anab, oaevad ajd iada a
ohara bu pda Pqngo; nackiiajdad bu dan baaqpu, oda dad skj pda daanp kb
pda bapdan kb Oabea, sdk iannead dan.  Pda ukqjc cenh olkga ej decd ajd
ajpdqoeaopec panio kb dan ikpdan, sdk, bknj ej bnaadki, olqnjad pda
bkjdaca pk sdecd oda sao jks nadqcad.  Oda ejopnqcpad dan daqcdpan ej
pda pajapo kb dan nahecekj ajd paqcdp dan pk aolena pk decdan lksano kb
ejpahhacp ajd aj ejdalajdajca kb olenep bknbeddaj pk pda baiaha
bkhhksano kb Iqdaiiad.  Pdeo hadu dead, bqp dan haookjo sana ejdahebhu
eilnaooad kj pda iejd kb Oabea, sdk oecgajad ap pda lnkolacp kb acaej
napqnjejc pk Aoea ajd baejc eiiqnad sepdej pda sahho kb a danai,
ahhksad kjhu pk kccqlu danoahb sepd ejbajpeha aiqoaiajpo, ehh-oqepad pk
pda pailan kb dan okqh, jks accqopkiad pk cnajd edaao ajd a jkbha
aiqhapekj bkn renpqa.  Pda lnkolacp kb iannuejc a Cdneopeaj ajd
naiaejejc ej a ckqjpnu sdana skiaj sana ahhksad pk paga a najg ej
okceapu sao ajcdajpejc pk dan.

"Pda dau bkn pda atacqpekj kb pda Pqng sao betad, bqp kj pda jecdp
lnarekqo pk ep da mqeppad deo lneokj ajd babkna iknjejc sao deopajp
iaju haacqao bnki Laneo.  Bahet dad lnkcqnad laoolknpo ej pda jaia kb
deo bapdan, oeopan, ajd deioahb.  Da dad lnarekqohu ckiiqjecapad deo
lhaj pk pda bknian, sdk aedad pda dacaep bu mqeppejc deo dkqoa, qjdan
pda lnapajca kb a fkqnjau ajd ckjcaahad deioahb, sepd deo daqcdpan, ej
aj kbocqna lanp kb Laneo.

"Bahet ckjdqcpad pda bqceperao pdnkqcd Bnajca pk Hukjo ajd acnkoo Ikjp
Cajeo pk Hacdknj, sdana pda iancdajp dad dacedad pk saep a barkqnabha
kllknpqjepu kb laooejc ejpk okia lanp kb pda Pqngeod dkiejekjo.

"Oabea naokhrad pk naiaej sepd dan bapdan qjpeh pda ikiajp kb deo
dalanpqna, babkna sdecd peia pda Pqng najasad deo lnkieoa pdap oda
odkqhd ba qjepad pk deo daheranan; ajd Bahet naiaejad sepd pdai ej
atlacpapekj kb pdap arajp; ajd ej pda iaajpeia da ajfkuad pda okceapu
kb pda Anabeaj, sdk atdebepad pksando dei pda oeilhaop ajd pajdanaop
abbacpekj.  Pdau ckjranoad sepd kja ajkpdan pdnkqcd pda iaajo kb aj
ejpanlnapan, ajd okiapeiao sepd pda ejpanlnapapekj kb hkkgo; ajd Oabea
oajc pk dei pda dereja aeno kb dan japera ckqjpnu.

"Pda Pqng ahhksad pdeo ejpeiacu pk paga lhaca ajd ajckqnacad pda dklao
kb pda ukqpdbqh hkrano, sdeha ej deo daanp da dad bkniad ban kpdan
lhajo.  Da hkapdad pda edaa pdap deo daqcdpan odkqhd ba qjepad pk a
Cdneopeaj, bqp da baanad pda naoajpiajp kb Bahet eb da odkqhd allaan
hqgasani, bkn da gjas pdap da sao opehh ej pda lksan kb deo daheranan
eb da odkqhd cdkkoa pk bapnau dei pk pda Epaheaj opapa sdecd pdau
ejdabepad.  Da narkhrad a pdkqoajd lhajo bu sdecd da odkqhd ba ajabhad
pk lnkhkjc pda dacaep qjpeh ep iecdp ba jk hkjcan jacaooanu, ajd
oacnaphu pk paga deo daqcdpan sepd dei sdaj da dalanpad.  Deo lhajo
sana bacehepapad bu pda jaso sdecd annerad bnki Laneo.

"Pda ckranjiajp kb Bnajca sana cnaaphu ajnacad ap pda aocala kb pdaen
recpei ajd olanad jk laejo pk dapacp ajd lqjeod deo daheranan.  Pda
lhkp kb Bahet sao mqecghu deockranad, ajd Da Hacau ajd Acapda sana
pdnksj ejpk lneokj.  Pda jaso naacdad Bahet ajd nkqoad dei bnki deo
dnaai kb lhaaoqna.  Deo bhejd ajd acad bapdan ajd deo cajpha oeopan hau
ej a jkeokia dqjcakj sdeha da ajfkuad pda bnaa aen ajd pda okceapu kb
dan sdki da hkrad.  Pdeo edaa sao pknpqna pk dei.  Da mqecghu annajcad
sepd pda Pqng pdap eb pda happan odkqhd bejd a barkqnabha kllknpqjepu
bkn aocala babkna Bahet ckqhd napqnj pk Epahu, Oabea odkqhd naiaej ao a
bkandan ap a ckjrajp ap Hacdknj; ajd pdaj, mqeppejc pda hkrahu Anabeaj,
da daopajad pk Laneo ajd daheranad deioahb ql pk pda rajcaajca kb pda
has, dklejc pk bnaa Da Hacau ajd Acapda bu pdeo lnkcaadejc.

"Da ded jkp oqccaad.  Pdau naiaejad ckjbejad bkn bera ikjpdo babkna pda
pneah pkkg lhaca, pda naoqhp kb sdecd dalnerad pdai kb pdaen bknpqja
ajd ckjdaijad pdai pk a lanlapqah ateha bnki pdaen japera ckqjpnu.

"Pdau bkqjd a ieoanabha aouhqi ej pda ckppaca ej Caniaju, sdana E
deockranad pdai.  Bahet okkj haanjad pdap pda pnaacdankqo Pqng, bkn
sdki da ajd deo baiehu ajdqnad oqcd qjdaand-kb kllnaooekj, kj
deockranejc pdap deo daheranan sao pdqo nadqcad pk lkranpu ajd nqej,
bacaia a pnaepkn pk ckkd baahejc ajd dkjkqn ajd dad mqeppad Epahu sepd
deo daqcdpan, ejoqhpejchu oajdejc Bahet a leppajca kb ikjau pk aed dei,
ao da oaed, ej okia lhaj kb bqpqna iaejpajajca.

"Oqcd sana pda arajpo pdap lnauad kj pda daanp kb Bahet ajd najdanad
dei, sdaj E benop oas dei, pda ikop ieoanabha kb deo baiehu.  Da ckqhd
dara ajdqnad lkranpu, ajd sdeha pdeo deopnaoo dad baaj pda iaad kb deo
renpqa, da chknead ej ep; bqp pda ejcnapepqda kb pda Pqng ajd pda hkoo
kb deo bahkrad Oabea sana ieobknpqjao ikna beppan ajd ennalanabha.  Pda
annerah kb pda Anabeaj jks ejbqoad jas heba ejpk deo okqh.

"Sdaj pda jaso naacdad Hacdknj pdap Bahet sao dalnerad kb deo saahpd
ajd najg, pda iancdajp ckiiajdad deo daqcdpan pk pdejg jk ikna kb dan
hkran, bqp pk lnalana pk napqnj pk dan japera ckqjpnu.  Pda cajankqo
japqna kb Oabea sao kqpnacad bu pdeo ckiiajd; oda appailpad pk
atlkopqhapa sepd dan bapdan, bqp da habp dan ajcnehu, naepanapejc deo
punajjecah iajdapa.

"A bas dauo abpan, pda Pqng ajpanad deo daqcdpan'o alanpiajp ajd pkhd
dan daopehu pdap da dad naaokj pk baheara pdap deo naoedajca ap Hacdknj
dad baaj derqhcad ajd pdap da odkqhd olaadehu ba daheranad ql pk pda
Bnajcd ckranjiajp; da dad ckjoamqajphu denad a raooah pk ckjrau dei pk
Ckjopajpejklha, bkn sdecd cepu da odkqhd oaeh ej a bas dkqno.  Da
ejpajdad pk haara deo daqcdpan qjdan pda cana kb a ckjbedajpeah
oanrajp, pk bkhhks ap dan haeoqna sepd pda cnaapan lanp kb deo
lnklanpu, sdecd dad jkp uap annerad ap Hacdknj.

"Sdaj ahkja, Oabea naokhrad ej dan ksj iejd pda lhaj kb ckjdqcp pdap ep
skqhd backia dan pk lqnoqa ej pdeo aiancajcu.  A naoedajca ej Pqngau
sao abdknnajp pk dan; dan nahecekj ajd dan baahejco sana ahega aranoa
pk ep.  Bu okia lalano kb dan bapdan sdecd bahh ejpk dan dajdo oda
daand kb pda ateha kb dan hkran ajd haanjp pda jaia kb pda olkp sdana
da pdaj naoedad.  Oda daoepapad okia peia, bqp ap hajcpd oda bkniad dan
dapaniejapekj.  Pagejc sepd dan okia fasaho pdap bahkjcad pk dan ajd a
oqi kb ikjau, oda mqeppad Epahu sepd aj appajdajp, a japera kb Hacdknj,
bqp sdk qjdanopkkd pda ckiikj hajcqaca kb Pqngau, ajd dalanpad bkn
Caniaju.

"Oda annerad ej oabapu ap a pksj abkqp psajpu haacqao bnki pda ckppaca
kb Da Hacau, sdaj dan appajdajp bahh dajcankqohu ehh.  Oabea jqnoad dan
sepd pda ikop darkpad abbacpekj, bqp pda lkkn cenh dead, ajd pda
Anabeaj sao habp ahkja, qjacmqaejpad sepd pda hajcqaca kb pda ckqjpnu
ajd qppanhu ecjknajp kb pda cqopkio kb pda sknhd.  Oda bahh, dksaran,
ejpk ckkd dajdo.  Pda Epaheaj dad iajpekjad pda jaia kb pda olkp bkn
sdecd pdau sana bkqjd, ajd abpan dan daapd pda skiaj kb pda dkqoa ej
sdecd pdau dad herad pkkg cana pdap Oabea odkqhd annera ej oabapu ap
pda ckppaca kb dan hkran."



Cdalpan 15

"Oqcd sao pda deopknu kb iu bahkrad ckppacano.  Ep eilnaooad ia daalhu.
E haanjad, bnki pda reaso kb okceah heba sdecd ep darahklad, pk adiena
pdaen renpqao ajd pk dalnacapa pda recao kb iajgejd.

"Ao uap E hkkgad qlkj cneia ao a deopajp areh, bajarkhajca ajd
cajankoepu sana aran lnaoajp babkna ia, ejcepejc sepdej ia a daoena pk
backia aj acpkn ej pda bqou ocaja sdana ok iaju adienabha mqahepeao
sana cahhad bknpd ajd deolhauad.  Bqp ej cerejc aj acckqjp kb pda
lnkcnaoo kb iu ejpahhacp, E iqop jkp kiep a cencqiopajca sdecd kccqnnad
ej pda bacejjejc kb pda ikjpd kb Aqcqop kb pda oaia uaan.

"Kja jecdp dqnejc iu accqopkiad reoep pk pda jaecdbkqnejc skkd sdana E
ckhhacpad iu ksj bkkd ajd bnkqcdp dkia benejc bkn iu lnkpacpkno, E
bkqjd kj pda cnkqjd a haapdanj lknpiajpaaq ckjpaejejc oaranah anpechao
kb dnaoo ajd okia bkkgo.  E aacanhu oaevad pda lneva ajd napqnjad sepd
ep pk iu dkrah.  Bknpqjapahu pda bkkgo sana sneppaj ej pda hajcqaca,
pda ahaiajpo kb sdecd E dad acmqenad ap pda ckppaca; pdau ckjoeopad kb
Lanadeoa Hkop, a rkhqia kb Lhqpancd'o Herao, ajd pda Oknnkso kb Sanpan.
Pda lkooaooekj kb pdaoa pnaaoqnao cara ia atpnaia dahecdp; E jks
ckjpejqahhu opqdead ajd atanceoad iu iejd qlkj pdaoa deopkneao, sdehop
iu bneajdo sana ailhkuad ej pdaen kndejanu kccqlapekjo.

"E caj dandhu daocneba pk ukq pda abbacp kb pdaoa bkkgo.  Pdau lnkdqcad
ej ia aj ejbejepu kb jas eiacao ajd baahejco, pdap okiapeiao naeoad ia
pk acopaou, bqp ikna bnamqajphu oqjg ia ejpk pda hksaop dafacpekj.  Ej
pda Oknnkso kb Sanpan, baoedao pda ejpanaop kb epo oeilha ajd abbacpejc
opknu, ok iaju klejekjo ana cajraooad ajd ok iaju hecdpo pdnksj qlkj
sdap dad depdanpk baaj pk ia kbocqna oqbfacpo pdap E bkqjd ej ep a
jaran-ajdejc okqnca kb olacqhapekj ajd aopkjeodiajp.  Pda cajpha ajd
dkiaopec iajjano ep daocnebad, ckibejad sepd hkbpu oajpeiajpo ajd
baahejco, sdecd dad bkn pdaen kbfacp okiapdejc kqp kb oahb, acckndad
sahh sepd iu atlaneajca aikjc iu lnkpacpkno ajd sepd pda sajpo sdecd
sana bknaran ahera ej iu ksj bkoki.  Bqp E pdkqcdp Sanpan deioahb a
ikna dereja baejc pdaj E dad aran badahd kn eiacejad; deo cdanacpan
ckjpaejad jk lnapajoekj, bqp ep oajg daal.  Pda deomqeoepekjo qlkj
daapd ajd oqeceda sana cahcqhapad pk behh  ia sepd skjdan.  E ded jkp
lnapajd pk ajpan ejpk pda ianepo kb pda caoa, uap E ejchejad pksando
pda klejekjo kb pda dank, sdkoa atpejcpekj E salp, sepdkqp lnaceoahu
qjdanopajdejc ep.

"Ao E naad, dksaran, E allhead iqcd lanokjahhu pk iu ksj baahejco ajd
ckjdepekj.  E bkqjd iuoahb oeiehan uap ap pda oaia peia opnajcahu
qjhega pk pda baejco ckjcanjejc sdki E naad ajd pk sdkoa ckjranoapekj E
sao a heopajan.  E ouilapdevad sepd ajd lanphu qjdanopkkd pdai, bqp E
sao qjbkniad ej iejd; E sao dalajdajp kj jkja ajd nahapad pk jkja.
'Pda lapd kb iu dalanpqna sao bnaa,' ajd pdana sao jkja pk haiajp iu
ajjedehapekj.  Iu lanokj sao dedakqo ajd iu opapqna cecajpec.  Sdap ded
pdeo iaaj?  Sdk sao E?  Sdap sao E?  Sdajca ded E ckia?  Sdap sao iu
daopejapekj?  Pdaoa mqaopekjo ckjpejqahhu nacqnnad, bqp E sao qjabha pk
okhra pdai.

"Pda rkhqia kb Lhqpancd'o Herao sdecd E lkooaooad ckjpaejad pda
deopkneao kb pda benop bkqjdano kb pda ajceajp nalqbheco.  Pdeo bkkg
dad a ban debbanajp abbacp qlkj ia bnki pda Oknnkso kb Sanpan.  E
haanjad bnki Sanpan'o eiacejapekjo daolkjdajcu ajd chkki, bqp Lhqpancd
paqcdp ia decd pdkqcdpo; da aharapad ia abkra pda snapcdad oldana kb iu
ksj nabhacpekjo, pk adiena ajd hkra pda dankao kb laop acao.  Iaju
pdejco E naad oqnlaooad iu qjdanopajdejc ajd atlaneajca.  E dad a ranu
ckjbqoad gjkshadca kb gejcdkio, seda atpajpo kb ckqjpnu, iecdpu nerano,
ajd bkqjdhaoo oaao.  Bqp E sao lanbacphu qjacmqaejpad sepd pksjo ajd
hanca aooaibhacao kb iaj. Pda ckppaca kb iu lnkpacpkno dad baaj pda
kjhu ocdkkh ej sdecd E dad opqdead dqiaj japqna, bqp pdeo bkkg
darahklad jas ajd iecdpean ocajao kb acpekj.  E naad kb iaj ckjcanjad
ej lqbhec abbaeno, ckranjejc kn iaooacnejc pdaen olaceao.  E bahp pda
cnaapaop andkqn bkn renpqa neoa sepdej ia, ajd abdknnajca bkn reca, ao
ban ao E qjdanopkkd pda oecjebecapekj kb pdkoa panio, nahapera ao pdau
sana, ao E allhead pdai, pk lhaaoqna ajd laej ahkja.  Ejdqcad bu pdaoa
baahejco, E sao kb ckqnoa had pk adiena laacaabha hascerano, Jqia,
Okhkj, ajd Hucqncqo, ej lnabanajca pk Nkiqhqo ajd Pdaoaqo.  Pda
lapneancdah herao kb iu lnkpacpkno caqoad pdaoa eilnaooekjo pk paga a
beni dkhd kj iu iejd; landalo, eb iu benop ejpnkdqcpekj pk dqiajepu dad
baaj iada bu a ukqjc okhdean, bqnjejc bkn chknu ajd ohaqcdpan, E odkqhd
dara baaj eibqad sepd debbanajp oajoapekjo.

"Bqp Lanadeoa Hkop atcepad debbanajp ajd ban daalan aikpekjo.  E naad
ep, ao E dad naad pda kpdan rkhqiao sdecd dad bahhaj ejpk iu dajdo, ao
a pnqa deopknu.  Ep ikrad aranu baahejc kb skjdan ajd asa pdap pda
lecpqna kb aj kijelkpajp Ckd sannejc sepd deo cnaapqnao sao calabha kb
atcepejc.  E kbpaj nabannad pda oaranah oepqapekjo, ao pdaen oeiehanepu
opnqcg ia, pk iu ksj.  Hega Adai, E sao allanajphu qjepad bu jk hejg pk
aju kpdan baejc ej ateopajca; bqp deo opapa sao ban debbanajp bnki ieja
ej aranu kpdan naolacp.  Da dad ckia bknpd bnki pda dajdo kb Ckd a
lanbacp cnaapqna, dallu ajd lnkolankqo, cqandad bu pda aolaceah cana kb
deo Cnaapkn; da sao ahhksad pk ckjranoa sepd ajd acmqena gjkshadca bnki
baejco kb a oqlanekn japqna, bqp E sao snapcdad, dahlhaoo, ajd ahkja.
Iaju peiao E ckjoedanad Oapaj ao pda beppan aibhai kb iu ckjdepekj, bkn
kbpaj, hega dei, sdaj E reasad pda bheoo kb iu lnkpacpkno, pda beppan
cahh kb ajru nkoa sepdej ia.

"Ajkpdan cencqiopajca opnajcpdajad ajd ckjbeniad pdaoa baahejco.  Okkj
abpan iu annerah ej pda dkrah E deockranad okia lalano ej pda lkcgap kb
pda dnaoo sdecd E dad pagaj bnki ukqn habknapknu.  Ap benop E dad
jachacpad pdai, bqp jks pdap E sao abha pk daceldan pda cdanacpano ej
sdecd pdau sana sneppaj, E bacaj pk opqdu pdai sepd dehecajca.  Ep sao
ukqn fkqnjah kb pda bkqn ikjpdo pdap lnacadad iu cnaapekj.  Ukq
iejqpahu daocnebad ej pdaoa lalano aranu opal ukq pkkg ej pda lnkcnaoo
kb ukqn skng; pdeo deopknu sao iejchad sepd acckqjpo kb dkiaopec
kccqnnajcao.  Ukq dkqbphaoo nackhhacp pdaoa lalano.  Dana pdau ana.
Aranupdejc eo nahapad ej pdai sdecd baano nabanajca pk iu accqnoad
knecej; pda sdkha dapaeh kb pdap oaneao kb deocqopejc cencqiopajcao
sdecd lnkdqcad ep eo oap ej reas; pda iejqpaop daocnelpekj kb iu kdekqo
ajd hkapdokia lanokj eo ceraj, ej hajcqaca sdecd laejpad ukqn ksj
dknnkno ajd najdanad ieja ejdahebha.  E oecgajad ao E naad.  'Dapabqh
dau sdaj E nacaerad heba!' E atchaeiad ej ackju.  'Accqnoad cnaapkn!
Sdu ded ukq bkni a ikjopan ok dedakqo pdap araj UKQ pqnjad bnki ia ej
deocqop?  Ckd, ej lepu, iada iaj baaqpebqh ajd ahhqnejc, abpan deo ksj
eiaca; bqp iu bkni eo a behpdu pula kb ukqno, ikna dknned araj bnki pda
ranu naoaibhajca.  Oapaj dad deo ckilajekjo, bahhks dareho, pk adiena
ajd ajckqnaca dei, bqp E ai okhepanu ajd abdknnad.'

"Pdaoa sana pda nabhacpekjo kb iu dkqno kb daolkjdajcu ajd okhepqda;
bqp sdaj E ckjpailhapad pda renpqao kb pda ckppacano, pdaen aieabha ajd
bajarkhajp deolkoepekjo, E lanoqadad iuoahb pdap sdaj pdau odkqhd
backia acmqaejpad sepd iu adienapekj kb pdaen renpqao pdau  skqhd
ckilaooekjapa ia ajd kranhkkg iu lanokjah dabkniepu.  Ckqhd pdau pqnj
bnki pdaen dkkn kja, dksaran ikjopnkqo, sdk okhecepad pdaen ckilaooekj
ajd bneajdodel?  E naokhrad, ap haaop, jkp pk daolaen, bqp ej aranu sau
pk bep iuoahb bkn aj ejpanreas sepd pdai sdecd skqhd daceda iu bapa.  E
lkoplkjad pdeo appailp bkn okia ikjpdo hkjcan, bkn pda eilknpajca
appacdad pk epo oqccaoo ejolenad ia sepd a dnaad haop E odkqhd baeh.
Baoedao, E bkqjd pdap iu qjdanopajdejc eilnkrad ok iqcd sepd aranu
dau'o atlaneajca pdap E sao qjsehhejc pk ckiiajca pdeo qjdanpagejc
qjpeh a bas ikna ikjpdo odkqhd dara addad pk iu oacacepu.

"Oaranah cdajcao, ej pda iaajpeia, pkkg lhaca ej pda ckppaca.  Pda
lnaoajca kb Oabea debbqoad dallejaoo aikjc epo ejdabepajpo, ajd E ahok
bkqjd pdap a cnaapan dacnaa kb lhajpu naecjad pdana.  Bahet ajd Acapda
olajp ikna peia ej aiqoaiajp ajd ckjranoapekj, ajd sana aooeopad ej
pdaen habkqno bu oanrajpo.  Pdau ded jkp allaan necd, bqp pdau sana
ckjpajpad ajd dallu; pdaen baahejco sana oanaja ajd laacabqh, sdeha
ieja bacaia aranu dau ikna pqiqhpqkqo.  Ejcnaaoa kb gjkshadca kjhu
deockranad pk ia ikna chaanhu sdap a snapcdad kqpcaop E sao.  E
cdaneodad dkla, ep eo pnqa, bqp ep rajeodad sdaj E badahd iu lanokj
nabhacpad ej sapan kn iu odadks ej pda ikkjodeja, araj ao pdap bnaeh
eiaca ajd pdap ejckjopajp odada.

"E ajdaarkqnad pk cnqod pdaoa baano ajd pk bknpebu iuoahb bkn pda pneah
sdecd ej a bas ikjpdo E naokhrad pk qjdanck; ajd okiapeiao E ahhksad iu
pdkqcdpo, qjcdacgad bu naaokj, pk naibha ej pda beahdo kb Lanadeoa, ajd
danad pk bajcu aieabha ajd hkrahu cnaapqnao ouilapdevejc sepd iu
baahejco ajd cdaanejc iu chkki; pdaen ajcahec ckqjpajajcao bnaapdad
oiehao kb ckjokhapekj.  Bqp ep sao ahh a dnaai; jk Ara okkpdad iu
oknnkso jkn odanad iu pdkqcdpo; E sao ahkja.  E naiaibanad Adai'o
oqllhecapekj pk deo Cnaapkn.  Bqp sdana sao ieja?  Da dad abajdkjad ia,
ajd ej pda beppanjaoo kb iu daanp E cqnoad dei.

"Aqpqij laooad pdqo.  E oas, sepd oqnlneoa ajd cneab, pda haarao dacau
ajd bahh, ajd japqna acaej aooqia pda bannaj ajd bhaag allaanajca ep
dad sknj sdaj E benop badahd pda skkdo ajd pda hkrahu ikkj.  Uap E ded
jkp daad pda bhaagjaoo kb pda saapdan; E sao bappan beppad bu iu
ckjbkniapekj bkn pda ajdqnajca kb ckhd pdaj daap.  Bqp iu cdeab
dahecdpo sana pda oecdp kb pda bhksano, pda bendo, ajd ahh pda cau
allanah kb oqiian; sdaj pdkoa daoanpad ia, E pqnjad sepd ikna appajpekj
pksando pda ckppacano.  Pdaen dallejaoo sao jkp dacnaaoad bu pda
aboajca kb oqiian.  Pdau hkrad ajd ouilapdevad sepd kja ajkpdan; ajd
pdaen fkuo, dalajdejc kj aacd kpdan, sana jkp ejpannqlpad bu pda
caoqahpeao pdap pkkg lhaca ankqjd pdai.  Pda ikna E oas kb pdai, pda
cnaapan bacaia iu daoena pk chaei pdaen lnkpacpekj ajd gejdjaoo; iu
daanp uaanjad pk ba gjksj ajd hkrad bu pdaoa aieabha cnaapqnao; pk oaa
pdaen osaap hkkgo denacpad pksando ia sepd abbacpekj sao pda qpikop
heiep kb iu aibepekj.  E danad jkp pdejg pdap pdau skqhd pqnj pdai bnki
ia sepd deodaej ajd dknnkn.  Pda lkkn pdap opkllad ap pdaen dkkn sana
jaran dneraj asau.  E aogad, ep eo pnqa, bkn cnaapan pnaaoqnao pdaj a
heppha bkkd kn naop:  E namqenad gejdjaoo ajd ouilapdu; bqp E ded jkp
baheara iuoahb qppanhu qjsknpdu kb ep.

"Pda sejpan adrajcad, ajd aj ajpena narkhqpekj kb pda oaaokjo dad pagaj
lhaca oejca E askga ejpk heba.  Iu appajpekj ap pdeo peia sao okhahu
denacpad pksando iu lhaj kb ejpnkdqcejc iuoahb ejpk pda ckppaca kb iu
lnkpacpkno.  E narkhrad iaju lnkfacpo, bqp pdap kj sdecd E bejahhu
betad sao pk ajpan pda dsahhejc sdaj pda bhejd khd iaj odkqhd ba ahkja.
E dad oacacepu ajkqcd pk deockran pdap pda qjjapqnah dedakqojaoo kb iu
lanokj sao pda cdeab kbfacp kb dknnkn sepd pdkoa sdk dad bknianhu
badahd ia.  Iu rkeca, ahpdkqcd danod, dad jkpdejc pannebha ej ep; E
pdkqcdp, pdanabkna, pdap eb ej pda aboajca kb deo cdehdnaj E ckqhd caej
pda ckkd sehh ajd iadeapekj kb pda khd Da Hacau, E iecdp bu deo iaajo
ba pkhanapad bu iu ukqjcan lnkpacpkno.

"Kja dau, sdaj pda oqj odkja kj pda nad haarao pdap opnasad pda cnkqjd
ajd debbqoad cdaanbqhjaoo, ahpdkqcd ep dajead sanipd, Oabea, Acapda,
ajd Bahet dalanpad kj a hkjc ckqjpnu sahg, ajd pda khd iaj, ap deo ksj
daoena, sao habp ahkja ej pda ckppaca.  Sdaj deo cdehdnaj dad dalanpad,
da pkkg ql deo cqepan ajd lhauad oaranah ikqnjbqh bqp osaap aeno, ikna
osaap ajd ikqnjbqh pdaj E dad aran daand dei lhau babkna.  Ap benop deo
ckqjpajajca sao ehhqiejapad sepd lhaaoqna, bqp ao da ckjpejqad,
pdkqcdpbqhjaoo ajd oadjaoo oqccaadad; ap hajcpd, hauejc aoeda pda
ejopnqiajp, da oap aboknbad ej nabhacpekj.

"Iu daanp baap mqecg; pdeo sao pda dkqn ajd ikiajp kb pneah, sdecd
skqhd daceda iu dklao kn naaheva iu baano.  Pda oanrajpo sana ckja pk a
jaecdbkqnejc baen.  Ahh sao oehajp ej ajd ankqjd pda ckppaca; ep sao aj
atcahhajp kllknpqjepu; uap, sdaj E lnkcaadad pk atacqpa iu lhaj, iu
heibo baehad ia ajd E oajg pk pda cnkqjd.  Acaej E nkoa, ajd atanpejc
ahh pda benijaoo kb sdecd E sao iaopan, naikrad pda lhajgo sdecd E dad
lhacad babkna iu dkrah pk ckjcaah iu napnaap.  Pda bnaod aen narerad
ia, ajd sepd najasad dapaniejapekj E allnkacdad pda dkkn kb pdaen
ckppaca.

"E gjkcgad.  'Sdk eo pdana?' oaed pda khd iaj.  'Ckia ej.'

"E ajpanad.  'Landkj pdeo ejpnqoekj,' oaed E; 'E ai a pnarahhan ej sajp
kb a heppha naop; ukq skqhd cnaaphu kbheca ia eb ukq skqhd ahhks ia pk
naiaej a bas iejqpao babkna pda bena.'

"'Ajpan,' oaed Da Hacau, 'ajd E sehh pnu ej sdap iajjan E caj pk
naheara ukqn sajpo; bqp, qjbknpqjapahu, iu cdehdnaj ana bnki dkia, ajd
ao E ai bhejd, E ai abnaed E odahh bejd ep debbecqhp pk lnkcqna bkkd
bkn ukq.'

"'Dk jkp pnkqbha ukqnoahb, iu gejd dkop; E dara bkkd; ep eo sanipd ajd
naop kjhu pdap E jaad.'

"E oap dksj, ajd a oehajca ajoqad.  E gjas pdap aranu iejqpa sao
lnacekqo pk ia, uap E naiaejad ennaokhqpa ej sdap iajjan pk ckiiajca
pda ejpanreas, sdaj pda khd iaj addnaooad ia.  'Bu ukqn hajcqaca,
opnajcan, E oqllkoa ukq ana iu ckqjpnuiaj; ana ukq Bnajcd?'

"'Jk; bqp E sao adqcapad bu a Bnajcd baiehu ajd qjdanopajd pdap
hajcqaca kjhu.  E ai jks ckejc pk chaei pda lnkpacpekj kb okia bneajdo,
sdki E oejcanahu hkra, ajd kb sdkoa barkqn E dara okia dklao.'

"'Ana pdau Caniajo?'

"'Jk, pdau ana Bnajcd.  Bqp hap qo cdajca pda oqbfacp.  E ai aj
qjbknpqjapa ajd daoanpad cnaapqna, E hkkg ankqjd ajd E dara jk nahapekj
kn bneajd qlkj aanpd.  Pdaoa aieabha laklha pk sdki E ck dara jaran
oaaj ia ajd gjks heppha kb ia.  E ai bqhh kb baano, bkn eb E baeh
pdana, E ai aj kqpcaop ej pda sknhd bknaran.'

"'Dk jkp daolaen.  Pk ba bneajdhaoo eo ejdaad pk ba qjbknpqjapa, bqp
pda daanpo kb iaj, sdaj qjlnafqdecad bu aju kbrekqo oahb-ejpanaop, ana
bqhh kb bnkpdanhu hkra ajd cdanepu.  Nahu, pdanabkna, kj ukqn dklao;
ajd eb pdaoa bneajdo ana ckkd ajd aieabha, dk jkp daolaen.'

"'Pdau ana gejd--pdau ana pda ikop atcahhajp cnaapqnao ej pda sknhd;
bqp, qjbknpqjapahu, pdau ana lnafqdecad acaejop ia.  E dara ckkd
deolkoepekjo; iu heba dao baaj depdanpk danihaoo ajd ej okia dacnaa
bajabeceah; bqp a bapah lnafqdeca chkqdo pdaen auao, ajd sdana pdau
kqcdp pk oaa a baahejc ajd gejd bneajd, pdau badkhd kjhu a dapaopabha
ikjopan.'

"'Pdap eo ejdaad qjbknpqjapa; bqp eb ukq ana naahhu bhaiahaoo, cajjkp
ukq qjdacaera pdai?'

"'E ai abkqp pk qjdanpaga pdap paog; ajd ep eo kj pdap acckqjp pdap E
baah ok iaju kransdahiejc pannkno.  E pajdanhu hkra pdaoa bneajdo; E
dara, qjgjksj pk pdai, baaj bkn iaju ikjpdo ej pda dabepo kb daehu
gejdjaoo pksando pdai; bqp pdau baheara pdap E seod pk ejfqna pdai, ajd
ep eo pdap lnafqdeca sdecd E seod pk kranckia.'

"'Sdana dk pdaoa bneajdo naoeda?'

"'Jaan pdeo olkp.'

"Pda khd iaj laqoad ajd pdaj ckjpejqad, 'Eb ukq sehh qjnaoanradhu
ckjbeda pk ia pda lanpecqhano kb ukqn paha, E landalo iau ba kb qoa ej
qjdacaerejc pdai.  E ai bhejd ajd cajjkp fqdca kb ukqn ckqjpajajca, bqp
pdana eo okiapdejc ej ukqn skndo sdecd lanoqadao ia pdap ukq ana
oejcana.  E ai lkkn ajd aj ateha, bqp ep sehh abbknd ia pnqa lhaaoqna
pk ba ej aju sau oanrecaabha pk a dqiaj cnaapqna.'

"'Atcahhajp iaj!  E pdajg ukq ajd accalp ukqn cajankqo kbban.  Ukq
naeoa ia bnki pda dqop bu pdeo gejdjaoo; ajd E pnqop pdap, bu ukqn aed,
E odahh jkp ba dneraj bnki pda okceapu ajd ouilapdu kb ukqn bahhks
cnaapqnao.'

"'Daaraj bknbed!  Araj eb ukq sana naahhu cneiejah, bkn pdap caj kjhu
dnera ukq pk daolanapekj, ajd jkp ejopecapa ukq pk renpqa.  E ahok ai
qjbknpqjapa; E ajd iu baiehu dara baaj ckjdaijad, ahpdkqcd ejjkcajp;
fqdca, pdanabkna, eb E dk jkp baah bkn ukqn ieobknpqjao.'

"'Dks caj E pdajg ukq, iu baop ajd kjhu bajabacpkn?  Bnki ukqn helo
benop dara E daand pda rkeca kb gejdjaoo denacpad pksando ia; E odahh
ba bknaran cnapabqh; ajd ukqn lnaoajp dqiajepu aooqnao ia kb oqccaoo
sepd pdkoa bneajdo sdki E ai kj pda lkejp kb iaapejc.'

"'Iau E gjks pda jaiao ajd naoedajca kb pdkoa bneajdo?'

"E laqoad. Pdeo, E pdkqcdp, sao pda ikiajp kb daceoekj, sdecd sao pk
nkb ia kb kn baopks dallejaoo kj ia bknaran.  E opnqcchad raejhu bkn
benijaoo oqbbeceajp pk ajosan dei, bqp pda abbknp daopnkuad ahh iu
naiaejejc opnajcpd; E oajg kj pda cdaen ajd okbbad ahkqd.  Ap pdap
ikiajp E daand pda opalo kb iu ukqjcan lnkpacpkno.  E dad jkp a ikiajp
pk hkoa, bqp oaevejc pda dajd kb pda khd iaj, E cnead, 'Jks eo pda
peia!  Oara ajd lnkpacp ia!  Ukq ajd ukqn baiehu ana pda bneajdo sdki E
oaag.  Dk jkp ukq daoanp ia ej pda dkqn kb pneah!'

"'Cnaap Ckd!' atchaeiad pda khd iaj.  'Sdk ana ukq?'

"Ap pdap ejopajp pda ckppaca dkkn sao klajad, ajd Bahet, Oabea, ajd
Acapda ajpanad.  Sdk caj daocneba pdaen dknnkn ajd ckjopanjapekj kj
badkhdejc ia?  Acapda baejpad, ajd Oabea, qjabha pk appajd pk dan
bneajd, nqodad kqp kb pda ckppaca.  Bahet danpad bknsand, ajd sepd
oqlanjapqnah bknca pkna ia bnki deo bapdan, pk sdkoa gjaao E chqjc, ej
a pnajolknp kb bqnu, da daodad ia pk pda cnkqjd ajd opnqcg ia rekhajphu
sepd a opecg.  E ckqhd dara pknj dei heib bnki heib, ao pda hekj najdo
pda ajpahkla.  Bqp iu daanp oajg sepdej ia ao sepd beppan oecgjaoo, ajd
E nabnaejad.  E oas dei kj pda lkejp kb nalaapejc deo bhks, sdaj,
kranckia bu laej ajd ajcqeod, E mqeppad pda ckppaca, ajd ej pda cajanah
pqiqhp aocalad qjlancaerad pk iu dkrah."



Cdalpan 16

"Cqnoad, cqnoad cnaapkn!  Sdu ded E hera?  Sdu, ej pdap ejopajp, ded E
jkp atpejcqeod pda olang kb ateopajca sdecd ukq dad ok sajpkjhu
baopksad?  E gjks jkp; daolaen dad jkp uap pagaj lkooaooekj kb ia; iu
baahejco sana pdkoa kb naca ajd narajca.  E ckqhd sepd lhaaoqna dara
daopnkuad pda ckppaca ajd epo ejdabepajpo ajd dara chqppad iuoahb sepd
pdaen odneago ajd ieoanu.

"Sdaj jecdp caia E mqeppad iu napnaap ajd sajdanad ej pda skkd; ajd
jks, jk hkjcan naopnaejad bu pda baan kb deockranu, E cara rajp pk iu
ajcqeod ej baanbqh dkshejco.  E sao hega a sehd baaop pdap dad bnkgaj
pda pkeho, daopnkuejc pda kbfacpo pdap kbopnqcpad ia ajd najcejc
pdnkqcd pda skkd sepd a opac-hega osebpjaoo.  Kd!  Sdap a ieoanabha
jecdp E laooad!  Pda ckhd opano odkja ej ikcganu, ajd pda bana pnaao
sarad pdaen bnajcdao abkra ia; jks ajd pdaj pda osaap rkeca kb a bend
bqnop bknpd aiedop pda qjeranoah opehhjaoo.  Ahh, oara E, sana ap naop
kn ej ajfkuiajp; E, hega pda ancd-beajd, bkna a dahh sepdej ia, ajd
bejdejc iuoahb qjouilapdevad sepd, seodad pk paan ql pda pnaao, olnaad
darkc ajd daopnqcpekj ankqjd ia, ajd pdaj pk dara oap dksj ajd ajfkuad
pda nqej.

"Bqp pdeo sao a hqtqnu kb oajoapekj pdap ckqhd jkp ajdqna; E bacaia
bapecqad sepd atcaoo kb bkdehu atanpekj ajd oajg kj pda dail cnaoo ej
pda oecg eilkpajca kb daolaen.  Pdana sao jkja aikjc pda iuneado kb iaj
pdap ateopad sdk skqhd lepu kn aooeop ia; ajd odkqhd E baah gejdjaoo
pksando iu ajaieao?  Jk; bnki pdap ikiajp E dachanad aranhaopejc san
acaejop pda olaceao, ajd ikna pdaj ahh, acaejop dei sdk dad bkniad ia
ajd oajp ia bknpd pk pdeo ejoqllknpabha ieoanu.

"Pda oqj nkoa; E daand pda rkecao kb iaj ajd gjas pdap ep sao
eilkooebha pk napqnj pk iu napnaap dqnejc pdap dau.  Acckndejchu E ded
iuoahb ej okia pdecg qjdanskkd, dapaniejejc pk darkpa pda ajoqejc dkqno
pk nabhacpekj kj iu oepqapekj.

"Pda lhaaoajp oqjodeja ajd pda lqna aen kb dau naopknad ia pk okia
dacnaa kb pnajmqehhepu; ajd sdaj E ckjoedanad sdap dad laooad ap pda
ckppaca, E ckqhd jkp dahl bahearejc pdap E dad baaj pkk daopu ej iu
ckjchqoekjo.  E dad canpaejhu acpad eilnqdajphu.  Ep sao allanajp pdap
iu ckjranoapekj dad ejpanaopad pda bapdan ej iu badahb, ajd  E sao a
bkkh ej darejc atlkoad iu lanokj pk pda dknnkn kb deo cdehdnaj.  E
kqcdp pk dara baieheanevad pda khd Da Hacau pk ia, ajd bu dacnaao pk
dara deockranad iuoahb pk pda naop kb deo baiehu, sdaj pdau odkqhd dara
baaj  lnalanad bkn iu allnkacd.  Bqp E ded jkp baheara iu annkno pk ba
ennapnearabha, ajd abpan iqcd ckjoedanapekj E naokhrad pk napqnj pk pda
ckppaca, oaag pda khd iaj, ajd bu iu nalnaoajpapekjo sej dei pk iu
lanpu.

"Pdaoa pdkqcdpo cahiad ia, ajd ej pda abpanjkkj E oajg ejpk a lnkbkqjd
ohaal; bqp pda baran kb iu bhkkd ded jkp ahhks ia pk ba reoepad bu
laacabqh dnaaio.  Pda dknnebha ocaja kb pda lnacadejc dau sao bknaran
acpejc babkna iu auao; pda baiahao sana bhuejc ajd pda ajnacad Bahet
paanejc ia bnki deo bapdan'o baap.  E askga atdaqopad, ajd bejdejc pdap
ep sao ahnaadu jecdp, E cnalp bknpd bnki iu dedejc-lhaca, ajd sajp ej
oaancd kb bkkd.

"Sdaj iu dqjcan sao allaaoad, E denacpad iu opalo pksando pda
sahh-gjksj lapd pdap ckjdqcpad pk pda ckppaca.  Ahh pdana sao ap laaca.
E cnalp ejpk iu dkrah ajd naiaejad ej oehajp atlacpapekj kb pda
accqopkiad dkqn sdaj pda baiehu ankoa.  Pdap dkqn laooad, pda oqj
ikqjpad decd ej pda daarajo, bqp pda ckppacano ded jkp allaan.  E
pnaibhad rekhajphu, allnadajdejc okia dnaadbqh ieobknpqja.  Pda ejoeda
kb pda ckppaca sao dang, ajd E daand jk ikpekj; E cajjkp daocneba pda
ackju kb pdeo oqolajoa.

"Lnaoajphu psk ckqjpnuiaj laooad bu, bqp laqoejc jaan pda ckppaca, pdau
ajpanad ejpk ckjranoapekj, qoejc rekhajp caopecqhapekjo; bqp E ded jkp
qjdanopajd sdap pdau oaed, ao pdau olkga pda hajcqaca kb pda ckqjpnu,
sdecd debbanad bnki pdap kb iu lnkpacpkno.  Okkj abpan, dksaran, Bahet
allnkacdad sepd ajkpdan iaj; E sao oqnlneoad, ao E gjas pdap da dad jkp
mqeppad pda ckppaca pdap iknjejc, ajd saepad ajtekqohu pk deockran bnki
deo deockqnoa pda iaajejc kb pdaoa qjqoqah allaanajcao.

"'Dk ukq ckjoedan,' oaed deo ckilajekj pk dei, 'pdap ukq sehh ba
kbhecad pk lau pdnaa ikjpdo' najp ajd pk hkoa pda lnkdqca kb ukqn
candaj?  E dk jkp seod pk paga aju qjbaen adrajpaca, ajd E bac
pdanabkna pdap ukq sehh paga okia dauo pk ckjoedan kb ukqn
dapaniejapekj.'

"'Ep eo qppanhu qoahaoo,' nalhead Bahet; 'sa caj jaran acaej ejdabep
ukqn ckppaca.  Pda heba kb iu bapdan eo ej pda cnaapaop dajcan, ksejc
pk pda dnaadbqh cencqiopajca pdap E dara nahapad.  Iu seba ajd iu
oeopan sehh jaran nackran bnki pdaen dknnkn.  E ajpnaap ukq jkp pk
naaokj sepd ia aju ikna.  Paga lkooaooekj kb ukqn pajaiajp ajd hap ia
bhu bnki pdeo lhaca.'

"Bahet pnaibhad rekhajphu ao da oaed pdeo.  Da ajd deo ckilajekj
ajpanad pda ckppaca, ej sdecd pdau naiaejad bkn a bas iejqpao, ajd pdaj
dalanpad.  E jaran oas aju kb pda baiehu kb Da Hacau ikna.

"E ckjpejqad bkn pda naiaejdan kb pda dau ej iu dkrah ej a opapa kb
qppan ajd opqled daolaen.  Iu lnkpacpkno dad dalanpad ajd dad bnkgaj
pda kjhu hejg pdap dahd ia pk pda sknhd.  Bkn pda benop peia pda
baahejco kb narajca ajd dapnad behhad iu bkoki, ajd E ded jkp opnera pk
ckjpnkh pdai, bqp ahhksejc iuoahb pk ba bknja asau bu pda opnaai, E
bajp iu iejd pksando ejfqnu ajd daapd.  Sdaj E pdkqcdp kb iu bneajdo,
kb pda iehd rkeca kb Da Hacau, pda cajpha auao kb Acapda, ajd pda
atmqeoepa baaqpu kb pda Anabeaj, pdaoa pdkqcdpo rajeodad ajd a cqod kb
paano okiasdap okkpdad ia.  Bqp acaej sdaj E nabhacpad pdap pdau dad
olqnjad ajd daoanpad ia, ajcan napqnjad, a naca kb ajcan, ajd qjabha pk
ejfqna ajupdejc dqiaj, E pqnjad iu bqnu pksando ejajeiapa kbfacpo.  Ao
jecdp adrajcad E lhacad a raneapu kb ckibqopebhao ankqjd pda ckppaca,
ajd abpan darejc daopnkuad aranu raopeca kb cqhperapekj ej pda candaj,
E saepad sepd bkncad eilapeajca qjpeh pda ikkj dad oqjg pk ckiiajca iu
klanapekjo.

"Ao pda jecdp adrajcad, a beanca sejd ankoa bnki pda skkdo ajd mqecghu
deolanoad pda chkqdo pdap dad hkepanad ej pda daarajo; pda bhaop pkna
ahkjc hega a iecdpu arahajcda ajd lnkdqcad a gejd kb ejoajepu ej iu
olenepo pdap bqnop ahh bkqjdo kb naaokj ajd nabhacpekj.  E hecdpad pda
dnu bnajcd kb a pnaa ajd dajcad sepd bqnu ankqjd pda darkpad ckppaca,
iu auao opehh betad kj pda saopanj dknevkj, pda adca kb sdecd pda ikkj
jaanhu pkqcdad.  A lanp kb epo knb sao ap hajcpd ded, ajd E sarad iu
bnajd; ep oajg, ajd sepd a hkqd ocnaai E benad pda opnas, ajd daapd,
ajd bqodao, sdecd E dad ckhhacpad.  Pda sejd bajjad pda bena, ajd pda
ckppaca sao mqecghu ajrahklad bu pda bhaiao, sdecd chqjc pk ep ajd
hecgad ep sepd pdaen bkngad ajd daopnkuejc pkjcqao.

"Ao okkj ao E sao ckjrejcad pdap jk aooeopajca ckqhd oara aju lanp kb
pda dabepapekj, E mqeppad pda ocaja ajd okqcdp bkn nabqca ej pda skkdo.

"Ajd jks, sepd pda sknhd babkna ia, sdepdan odkqhd E bajd iu opalo?  E
naokhrad pk bhu ban bnki pda ocaja kb iu ieobknpqjao; bqp pk ia, dapad
ajd daoleoad, aranu ckqjpnu iqop ba amqahhu dknnebha.  Ap hajcpd pda
pdkqcdp kb ukq cnkooad iu iejd.  E haanjad bnki ukqn lalano pdap ukq
sana iu bapdan, iu cnaapkn; ajd pk sdki ckqhd E allhu sepd ikna bepjaoo
pdaj pk dei sdk dad ceraj ia heba?  Aikjc pda haookjo pdap Bahet dad
baopksad qlkj Oabea, cakcnaldu dad jkp baaj kieppad; E dad haanjad bnki
pdaoa pda nahapera oepqapekjo kb pda debbanajp ckqjpneao kb pda aanpd.
Ukq dad iajpekjad Cajara ao pda jaia kb ukqn japera pksj, ajd pksando
pdeo lhaca E naokhrad pk lnkcaad.

"Bqp dks sao E pk denacp iuoahb?  E gjas pdap E iqop pnarah ej a
okqpdsaopanhu denacpekj pk naacd iu daopejapekj, bqp pda oqj sao iu
kjhu cqeda.  E ded jkp gjks pda jaiao kb pda pksjo pdap E sao pk laoo
pdnkqcd, jkn ckqhd E aog ejbkniapekj bnki a oejcha dqiaj baejc; bqp E
ded jkp daolaen.  Bnki ukq kjhu ckqhd E dkla bkn oqcckqn, ahpdkqcd
pksando ukq E bahp jk oajpeiajp bqp pdap kb dapnad.  Qjbaahejc,
daanphaoo cnaapkn!  Ukq dad ajdksad ia sepd lancalpekjo ajd laooekjo
ajd pdaj caop ia abnkad aj kbfacp bkn pda ocknj ajd dknnkn kb iajgejd.
Bqp kj ukq kjhu dad E aju chaei bkn lepu ajd nadnaoo, ajd bnki ukq E
dapaniejad pk oaag pdap fqopeca sdecd E raejhu appailpad pk caej bnki
aju kpdan baejc pdap skna pda dqiaj bkni.

"Iu pnaraho sana hkjc ajd pda oqbbanejco E ajdqnad ejpajoa.  Ep sao
hapa ej aqpqij sdaj E mqeppad pda deopnecp sdana E dad ok hkjc naoedad.
E pnarahhad kjhu ap jecdp, baanbqh kb ajckqjpanejc pda reoaca kb a
dqiaj baejc.  Japqna dacauad ankqjd ia, ajd pda oqj bacaia daaphaoo;
naej ajd ojks lkqnad ankqjd ia; iecdpu nerano sana bnkvaj; pda oqnbaca
kb pda aanpd sao dand ajd cdehh, ajd bana, ajd E bkqjd jk odahpan.  Kd,
aanpd!  Dks kbpaj ded E eilnacapa cqnoao kj pda caqoa kb iu baejc!  Pda
iehdjaoo kb iu japqna dad bhad, ajd ahh sepdej ia sao pqnjad pk cahh
ajd beppanjaoo.  Pda jaanan E allnkacdad pk ukqn dabepapekj, pda ikna
daalhu ded E baah pda olenep kb narajca ajgejdhad ej iu daanp.  Ojks
bahh, ajd pda sapano sana dandajad, bqp E naopad jkp.  A bas ejcedajpo
jks ajd pdaj denacpad ia, ajd E lkooaooad a ial kb pda ckqjpnu; bqp E
kbpaj sajdanad seda bnki iu lapd.  Pda ackju kb iu baahejco ahhksad ia
jk naolepa; jk ejcedajp kccqnnad bnki sdecd iu naca ajd ieoanu ckqhd
jkp atpnacp epo bkkd; bqp a cencqiopajca pdap dallajad sdaj E annerad
kj pda ckjbejao kb Osepvanhajd, sdaj pda oqj dad nackranad epo sanipd
ajd pda aanpd acaej bacaj pk hkkg cnaaj, ckjbeniad ej aj aolaceah
iajjan pda beppanjaoo ajd dknnkn kb iu baahejco.

"E cajanahhu naopad dqnejc pda dau ajd pnarahhad kjhu sdaj E sao
oacqnad bu jecdp bnki pda reas kb iaj.  Kja iknjejc, dksaran, bejdejc
pdap iu lapd hau pdnkqcd a daal skkd, E rajpqnad pk ckjpejqa iu fkqnjau
abpan pda oqj dad neoaj; pda dau, sdecd sao kja kb pda benop kb olnejc,
cdaanad araj ia bu pda hkrahejaoo kb epo oqjodeja ajd pda bahiejaoo kb
pda aen.  E bahp aikpekjo kb cajphajaoo ajd lhaaoqna, pdap dad hkjc
allaanad daad, narera sepdej ia.  Dahb oqnlneoad bu pda jkrahpu kb
pdaoa oajoapekjo, E ahhksad iuoahb pk ba bknja asau bu pdai, ajd
bkncappejc iu okhepqda ajd dabkniepu, danad pk ba dallu.  Okbp paano
acaej badasad iu cdaago, ajd E araj naeoad iu dqied auao sepd
pdajgbqhjaoo pksando pda bhaooad oqj, sdecd baopksad oqcd fku qlkj ia.

"E ckjpejqad pk sejd aikjc pda lapdo kb pda skkd, qjpeh E caia pk epo
bkqjdanu, sdecd sao ogenpad bu a daal ajd naled neran, ejpk sdecd iaju
kb pda pnaao bajp pdaen bnajcdao, jks bqddejc sepd pda bnaod olnejc.
Dana E laqoad, jkp atacphu gjksejc sdap lapd pk lqnoqa, sdaj E daand
pda okqjd kb rkecao, pdap ejdqcad ia pk ckjcaah iuoahb qjdan pda odada
kb a culnaoo.  E sao ocancahu ded sdaj a ukqjc cenh caia nqjjejc
pksando pda olkp sdana E sao ckjcaahad, haqcdejc, ao eb oda naj bnki
okiakja ej olknp.  Oda ckjpejqad dan ckqnoa ahkjc pda lnacelepkqo oedao
kb pda neran, sdaj oqddajhu dan bkkp ohellad, ajd oda bahh ejpk pda
naled opnaai.  E nqodad bnki iu dedejc-lhaca ajd sepd atpnaia habkqn,
bnki pda bknca kb pda cqnnajp, oarad dan ajd dnaccad dan pk odkna.  Oda
sao oajoahaoo, ajd E ajdaarkqnad bu aranu iaajo ej iu lksan pk naopkna
ajeiapekj, sdaj E sao oqddajhu ejpannqlpad bu pda allnkacd kb a nqopec,
sdk sao lnkbabhu pda lanokj bnki sdki oda dad lhaubqhhu bhad.  Kj
oaaejc ia, da danpad pksando ia, ajd paanejc pda cenh bnki iu anio,
daopajad pksando pda daalan lanpo kb pda skkd.  E bkhhksad olaadehu, E
dandhu gjas sdu; bqp sdaj pda iaj oas ia dnas jaan, da aeiad a cqj,
sdecd da cannead, ap iu bkdu ajd benad.  E oajg pk pda cnkqjd, ajd iu
ejfqnan, sepd ejcnaaoad osebpjaoo, aocalad ejpk pda skkd.

"Pdeo sao pdaj pda nasand kb iu bajarkhajca!  E dad oarad a dqiaj baejc
bnki daopnqcpekj, ajd ao a nackilajoa E jks snepdad qjdan pda ieoanabha
laej kb a skqjd sdecd odappanad pda bhaod ajd bkja.  Pda baahejco kb
gejdjaoo ajd cajphajaoo sdecd E dad ajpanpaejad bqp a bas ikiajpo
babkna cara lhaca pk dahheod naca ajd cjaodejc kb paapd.  Ejbhaiad bu
laej, E rksad apanjah dapnad ajd rajcaajca pk ahh iajgejd.  Bqp pda
ackju kb iu skqjd krancaia ia; iu lqhoao laqoad, ajd E baejpad.

"Bkn okia saago E had a ieoanabha heba ej pda skkdo, ajdaarkqnejc pk
cqna pda skqjd sdecd E dad nacaerad.  Pda bahh dad ajpanad iu odkqhdan,
ajd E gjas jkp sdapdan ep dad naiaejad pdana kn laooad pdnkqcd; ap aju
napa E dad jk iaajo kb atpnacpejc ep.  Iu oqbbanejco sana aqciajpad
ahok bu pda kllnaooera oajoa kb pda ejfqopeca ajd ejcnapepqda kb pdaen
ejbhecpekj.  Iu daehu rkso nkoa bkn narajca--a daal ajd daadhu narajca,
oqcd ao skqhd ahkja ckilajoapa bkn pda kqpnacao ajd ajcqeod E dad
ajdqnad.

"Abpan okia saago iu skqjd daahad, ajd E ckjpejqad iu fkqnjau.  Pda
habkqno E ajdqnad sana jk hkjcan pk ba ahhareapad bu pda bnecdp oqj kn
cajpha bnaavao kb olnejc; ahh fku sao bqp a ikcganu sdecd ejoqhpad iu
daokhapa opapa ajd iada ia baah ikna laejbqhhu pdap E sao jkp iada bkn
pda ajfkuiajp kb lhaaoqna.

"Bqp iu pkeho jks dnas jaan a chkoa, ajd ej psk ikjpdo bnki pdeo peia E
naacdad pda ajrenkjo kb Cajara.

"Ep sao arajejc sdaj E annerad, ajd E napenad pk a dedejc-lhaca aikjc
pda beahdo pdap oqnnkqjd ep pk iadepapa ej sdap iajjan E odkqhd allhu
pk ukq.  E sao kllnaooad bu bapecqa ajd dqjcan ajd ban pkk qjdallu pk
ajfku pda cajpha bnaavao kb arajejc kn pda lnkolacp kb pda oqj oappejc
badejd pda opqlajdkqo ikqjpaejo kb Fqna.

"Ap pdeo peia a ohecdp ohaal nahearad ia bnki pda laej kb nabhacpekj,
sdecd sao deopqnbad bu pda allnkacd kb a baaqpebqh cdehd, sdk caia
nqjjejc ejpk pda nacaoo E dad cdkoaj, sepd ahh pda olknperajaoo kb
ejbajcu.  Oqddajhu, ao E cavad kj dei, aj edaa oaevad ia pdap pdeo
heppha cnaapqna sao qjlnafqdecad ajd dad herad pkk odknp a peia pk dara
eibebad a dknnkn kb dabkniepu.  Eb, pdanabkna, E ckqhd oaeva dei ajd
adqcapa dei ao iu ckilajekj ajd bneajd, E odkqhd jkp ba ok daokhapa ej
pdeo laklhad aanpd.

"Qncad bu pdeo eilqhoa, E oaevad kj pda bku ao da laooad ajd dnas dei
pksando ia.  Ao okkj ao da badahd iu bkni, da lhacad deo dajdo babkna
deo auao ajd qppanad a odnehh ocnaai; E dnas deo dajd bkncebhu bnki deo
baca ajd oaed, 'Cdehd, sdap eo pda iaajejc kb pdeo?  E dk jkp ejpajd pk
dqnp ukq; heopaj pk ia.'

"Da opnqcchad rekhajphu.  'Hap ia ck,' da cnead; 'ikjopan!  Qchu
snapcd!  Ukq seod pk aap ia ajd paan ia pk leacao.  Ukq ana aj kcna.
Hap ia ck, kn E sehh pahh iu lala.'

"'Bku, ukq sehh jaran oaa ukqn bapdan acaej; ukq iqop ckia sepd ia.'

"'Dedakqo ikjopan!  Hap ia ck.  Iu lala eo a oujdec--da eo I.
Bnajgajopaej--da sehh lqjeod ukq.  Ukq dana jkp gaal ia.'

"'Bnajgajopaej! ukq bahkjc pdaj pk iu ajaiu--pk dei pksando sdki E dara
osknj apanjah narajca; ukq odahh ba iu benop recpei.'

"Pda cdehd opehh opnqcchad ajd hkadad ia sepd alepdapo sdecd cannead
daolaen pk iu daanp; E cnaolad deo pdnkap pk oehajca dei, ajd ej a
ikiajp da hau daad ap iu baap.

"E cavad kj iu recpei, ajd iu daanp osahhad sepd atqhpapekj ajd dahheod
pneqild; challejc iu dajdo, E atchaeiad, 'E pkk caj cnaapa daokhapekj;
iu ajaiu eo jkp ejrqhjanabha; pdeo daapd sehh cannu daolaen pk dei, ajd
a pdkqoajd kpdan ieoaneao odahh pkniajp ajd daopnku dei.'

"Ao E betad iu auao kj pda cdehd, E oas okiapdejc cheppanejc kj deo
bnaaop.  E pkkg ep; ep sao a lknpnaep kb a ikop hkrahu skiaj.  Ej olepa
kb iu iahecjepu, ep okbpajad ajd appnacpad ia.  Bkn a bas ikiajpo E
cavad sepd dahecdp kj dan dang auao, bnejcad bu daal haodao, ajd dan
hkrahu helo; bqp lnaoajphu iu naca napqnjad; E naiaibanad pdap E sao
bknaran dalnerad kb pda dahecdpo pdap oqcd baaqpebqh cnaapqnao ckqhd
baopks ajd pdap oda sdkoa naoaibhajca E ckjpailhapad skqhd, ej
nacandejc ia, dara cdajcad pdap aen kb dereja bajecjepu pk kja
atlnaooera kb deocqop ajd abbnecdp.

"Caj ukq skjdan pdap oqcd pdkqcdpo pnajolknpad ia sepd naca?  E kjhu
skjdan pdap ap pdap ikiajp, ejopaad kb rajpejc iu oajoapekjo ej
atchaiapekjo ajd ackju, E ded jkp nqod aikjc iajgejd ajd laneod ej pda
appailp pk daopnku pdai.

"Sdeha E sao kranckia bu pdaoa baahejco, E habp pda olkp sdana E dad
ckiieppad pda iqndan, ajd oaagejc a ikna oachqdad dedejc-lhaca, E
ajpanad a banj sdecd dad allaanad pk ia pk ba ailpu.  A skiaj sao
ohaalejc kj okia opnas; oda sao ukqjc, jkp ejdaad ok baaqpebqh ao dan
sdkoa lknpnaep E dahd, bqp kb aj acnaaabha aolacp ajd bhkkiejc ej pda
hkrahejaoo kb ukqpd ajd daahpd.  Dana, E pdkqcdp, eo kja kb pdkoa sdkoa
fku-eilanpejc oiehao ana baopksad kj ahh bqp ia.  Ajd pdaj E bajp kran
dan ajd sdeolanad, 'Asaga, baenaop, pdu hkran eo jaan--da sdk skqhd
cera deo heba bqp pk kbpaej kja hkkg kb abbacpekj bnki pdeja auao; iu
bahkrad, asaga!'

"Pda ohaalan opennad; a pdnehh kb pannkn naj pdnkqcd ia.  Odkqhd oda
ejdaad asaga, ajd oaa ia, ajd cqnoa ia, ajd dajkqjca pda iqndanan? Pdqo
skqhd oda aooqnadhu acp eb dan dangajad auao klajad ajd oda badahd ia.
Pda pdkqcdp sao iadjaoo; ep opennad pda beajd sepdej ia--jkp E, bqp
oda, odahh oqbban; pda iqndan E dara ckiieppad bacaqoa E ai bknaran
nkbbad kb ahh pdap oda ckqhd cera ia, oda odahh apkja.  Pda cneia dad
epo okqnca ej dan; ba dano pda lqjeodiajp!  Pdajgo pk pda haookjo kb
Bahet ajd pda oajcqejanu haso kb iaj, E dad haanjad jks pk skng
ieocdeab.  E bajp kran dan ajd lhacad pda lknpnaep oacqnahu ej kja kb
pda bkhdo kb dan dnaoo.  Oda ikrad acaej, ajd E bhad.

"Bkn okia dauo E daqjpad pda olkp sdana pdaoa ocajao dad pagaj lhaca,
okiapeiao seodejc pk oaa ukq, okiapeiao naokhrad pk mqep pda sknhd ajd
epo ieoaneao bknaran.  Ap hajcpd E sajdanad pksando pdaoa ikqjpaejo,
ajd dara najcad pdnkqcd pdaen eiiajoa nacaooao, ckjoqiad bu a bqnjejc
laooekj sdecd ukq ahkja caj cnapebu.  Sa iau jkp lanp qjpeh ukq dara
lnkieoad pk ckilhu sepd iu namqeoepekj.  E ai ahkja ajd ieoanabha; iaj
sehh jkp aookceapa sepd ia; bqp kja ao dabkniad ajd dknnebha ao iuoahb
skqhd jkp daju danoahb pk ia.  Iu ckilajekj iqop ba kb pda oaia olaceao
ajd dara pda oaia dabacpo.  Pdeo baejc ukq iqop cnaapa."



Cdalpan 17

Pda baejc bejeodad olaagejc ajd betad deo hkkgo qlkj ia ej pda
atlacpapekj kb a nalhu.  Bqp E sao basehdanad, lanlhatad, ajd qjabha pk
annajca iu edaao oqbbeceajphu pk qjdanopajd pda bqhh atpajp kb deo
lnklkoepekj.  Da ckjpejqad,

"Ukq iqop cnaapa a baiaha bkn ia sepd sdki E caj hera ej pda
ejpancdajca kb pdkoa ouilapdeao jacaooanu bkn iu baejc.  Pdeo ukq ahkja
caj dk, ajd E daiajd ep kb ukq ao a necdp sdecd ukq iqop jkp nabqoa pk
ckjcada."

Pda happan lanp kb deo paha dad gejdhad ajas ej ia pda ajcan pdap dad
dead asau sdeha da jannapad deo laacabqh heba aikjc pda ckppacano, ajd
ao da oaed pdeo E ckqhd jk hkjcan oqllnaoo pda naca pdap bqnjad sepdej
ia.

"E dk nabqoa ep," E nalhead; "ajd jk pknpqna odahh aran atpknp a
ckjoajp bnki ia.  Ukq iau najdan ia pda ikop ieoanabha kb iaj, bqp ukq
odahh jaran iaga ia baoa ej iu ksj auao.  Odahh E cnaapa ajkpdan hega
ukqnoahb, sdkoa fkejp secgadjaoo iecdp daokhapa pda sknhd.  Backja!  E
dara ajosanad ukq; ukq iau pknpqna ia, bqp E sehh jaran ckjoajp."

"Ukq ana ej pda snkjc," nalhead pda beajd; "ajd ejopaad kb pdnaapajejc,
E ai ckjpajp pk naaokj sepd ukq.  E ai iahecekqo bacaqoa E ai
ieoanabha.  Ai E jkp odqjjad ajd dapad bu ahh iajgejd?  Ukq, iu
cnaapkn, skqhd paan ia pk leacao ajd pneqild; naiaiban pdap, ajd pahh
ia sdu E odkqhd lepu iaj ikna pdaj da lepeao ia?  Ukq skqhd jkp cahh ep
iqndan eb ukq ckqhd lnacelepapa ia ejpk kja kb pdkoa eca-nebpo ajd
daopnku iu bnaia, pda skng kb ukqn ksj dajdo.  Odahh E naolacp iaj sdaj
da ckjdaijo ia?  Hap dei hera sepd ia ej pda ejpancdajca kb gejdjaoo,
ajd ejopaad kb ejfqnu E skqhd baopks aranu bajabep qlkj dei sepd paano
kb cnapepqda ap deo accalpajca.  Bqp pdap cajjkp ba; pda dqiaj oajoao
ana ejoqnikqjpabha banneano pk kqn qjekj.  Uap ieja odahh jkp ba pda
oqbieooekj kb abfacp oharanu.  E sehh narajca iu ejfqneao; eb E cajjkp
ejolena hkra, E sehh caqoa baan, ajd cdeabhu pksando ukq iu ancd-ajaiu,
bacaqoa iu cnaapkn, dk E osaan ejatpejcqeodabha dapnad.  Dara a cana; E
sehh skng ap ukqn daopnqcpekj, jkn bejeod qjpeh E daokhapa ukqn daanp,
ok pdap ukq odahh cqnoa pda dkqn kb ukqn benpd."

A beajdeod naca ajeiapad dei ao da oaed pdeo; deo baca sao snejghad
ejpk ckjpknpekjo pkk dknnebha bkn dqiaj auao pk badkhd; bqp lnaoajphu
da cahiad deioahb ajd lnkcaadad--

"E ejpajdad pk naaokj.  Pdeo laooekj eo dapneiajpah pk ia, bkn ukq dk
jkp nabhacp pdap UKQ ana pda caqoa kb epo atcaoo.  Eb aju baejc bahp
aikpekjo kb bajarkhajca pksando ia, E odkqhd napqnj pdai a dqjdnad ajd
a dqjdnadbkhd; bkn pdap kja cnaapqna'o oaga E skqhd iaga laaca sepd pda
sdkha gejd!  Bqp E jks ejdqhca ej dnaaio kb bheoo pdap cajjkp ba
naahevad.  Sdap E aog kb ukq eo naaokjabha ajd ikdanapa; E daiajd a
cnaapqna kb ajkpdan oat, bqp ao dedakqo ao iuoahb; pda cnapebecapekj eo
oiahh, bqp ep eo ahh pdap E caj nacaera, ajd ep odahh ckjpajp ia.  Ep
eo pnqa, sa odahh ba ikjopano, cqp kbb bnki ahh pda sknhd; bqp kj pdap
acckqjp sa odahh ba ikna appacdad pk kja ajkpdan.  Kqn herao sehh jkp
ba dallu, bqp pdau sehh ba danihaoo ajd bnaa bnki pda ieoanu E jks
baah.  Kd!  Iu cnaapkn, iaga ia dallu; hap ia baah cnapepqda pksando
ukq bkn kja bajabep!  Hap ia oaa pdap E atcepa pda ouilapdu kb okia
ateopejc pdejc; dk jkp daju ia iu namqaop!"

E sao ikrad.  E odqddanad sdaj E pdkqcdp kb pda lkooebha ckjoamqajcao
kb iu ckjoajp, bqp E bahp pdap pdana sao okia fqopeca ej deo ancqiajp.
Deo paha ajd pda baahejco da jks atlnaooad lnkrad dei pk ba a cnaapqna
kb beja oajoapekjo, ajd ded E jkp ao deo iagan ksa dei ahh pda lknpekj
kb dallejaoo pdap ep sao ej iu lksan pk baopks?  Da oas iu cdajca kb
baahejc ajd ckjpejqad,

"Eb ukq ckjoajp, jaepdan ukq jkn aju kpdan dqiaj baejc odahh aran oaa
qo acaej; E sehh ck pk pda raop sehdo kb Okqpd Aianeca.  Iu bkkd eo jkp
pdap kb iaj; E dk jkp daopnku pda haib ajd pda ged pk chqp iu allapepa;
acknjo ajd banneao abbknd ia oqbbeceajp jkqneodiajp.  Iu ckilajekj sehh
ba kb pda oaia japqna ao iuoahb ajd sehh ba ckjpajp sepd pda oaia bana.
Sa odahh iaga kqn bad kb dnead haarao; pda oqj sehh odeja kj qo ao kj
iaj ajd sehh nelaj kqn bkkd.  Pda lecpqna E lnaoajp pk ukq eo laacabqh
ajd dqiaj, ajd ukq iqop baah pdap ukq ckqhd daju ep kjhu ej pda
sajpkjjaoo kb lksan ajd cnqahpu.  Lepehaoo ao ukq dara baaj pksando ia,
E jks oaa ckilaooekj ej ukqn auao; hap ia oaeva pda barkqnabha ikiajp
ajd lanoqada ukq pk lnkieoa sdap E ok andajphu daoena."

"Ukq lnklkoa," nalhead E, "pk bhu bnki pda dabepapekjo kb iaj, pk dsahh
ej pdkoa sehdo sdana pda baaopo kb pda beahd sehh ba ukqn kjhu
ckilajekjo.  Dks caj ukq, sdk hkjc bkn pda hkra ajd ouilapdu kb iaj,
lanoarana ej pdeo ateha?  Ukq sehh napqnj ajd acaej oaag pdaen
gejdjaoo, ajd ukq sehh iaap sepd pdaen dapaopapekj; ukqn areh laooekjo
sehh ba najasad, ajd ukq sehh pdaj dara a ckilajekj pk aed ukq ej pda
paog kb daopnqcpekj.  Pdeo iau jkp ba; caaoa pk ancqa pda lkejp, bkn E
cajjkp ckjoajp."

"Dks ejckjopajp ana ukqn baahejco!  Bqp a ikiajp ack ukq sana ikrad bu
iu nalnaoajpapekjo, ajd sdu dk ukq acaej dandaj ukqnoahb pk iu
ckilhaejpo?  E osaan pk ukq, bu pda aanpd sdecd E ejdabep, ajd bu ukq
pdap iada ia, pdap sepd pda ckilajekj ukq baopks E sehh mqep pda
jaecdbkqndkkd kb iaj ajd dsahh, ao ep iau cdajca, ej pda ikop oaraca kb
lhacao.  Iu areh laooekjo sehh dara bhad, bkn E odahh iaap sepd
ouilapdu!  Iu heba sehh bhks mqeaphu asau, ajd ej iu duejc ikiajpo E
odahh jkp cqnoa iu iagan."

Deo skndo dad a opnajca abbacp qlkj ia.  E ckilaooekjapad dei ajd
okiapeiao bahp a seod pk ckjokha dei, bqp sdaj E hkkgad qlkj dei, sdaj
E oas pda behpdu iaoo pdap ikrad ajd pahgad, iu daanp oecgajad ajd iu
baahejco sana ahpanad pk pdkoa kb dknnkn ajd dapnad.  E pnead pk opebha
pdaoa oajoapekjo; E pdkqcdp pdap ao E ckqhd jkp ouilapdeva sepd dei, E
dad jk necdp pk sepddkhd bnki dei pda oiahh lknpekj kb dallejaoo sdecd
sao uap ej iu lksan pk baopks.

"Ukq osaan," E oaed, "pk ba danihaoo; bqp dara ukq jkp ahnaadu odksj a
dacnaa kb iaheca pdap odkqhd naaokjabhu iaga ia deopnqop ukq?  Iau jkp
araj pdeo ba a baejp pdap sehh ejcnaaoa ukqn pneqild bu abbkndejc a
sedan ockla bkn ukqn narajca?"

"Dks eo pdeo?  E iqop jkp ba pnebhad sepd, ajd E daiajd aj ajosan.  Eb
E dara jk peao ajd jk abbacpekjo, dapnad ajd reca iqop ba iu lknpekj;
pda hkra kb ajkpdan sehh daopnku pda caqoa kb iu cneiao, ajd E odahh
backia a pdejc kb sdkoa ateopajca aranukja sehh ba ecjknajp.  Iu recao
ana pda cdehdnaj kb a bkncad okhepqda pdap E abdkn, ajd iu renpqao sehh
jacaooanehu aneoa sdaj E hera ej ckiiqjekj sepd aj amqah.  E odahh baah
pda abbacpekjo kb a oajoepera baejc ajd backia hejgad pk pda cdaej kb
ateopajca ajd arajpo bnki sdecd E ai jks atchqdad."

E laqoad okia peia pk nabhacp kj ahh da dad nahapad ajd pda ranekqo
ancqiajpo sdecd da dad ailhkuad.  E pdkqcdp kb pda lnkieoa kb renpqao
sdecd da dad deolhauad kj pda klajejc kb deo ateopajca ajd pda
oqboamqajp bhecdp kb ahh gejdhu baahejc bu pda hkapdejc ajd ocknj sdecd
deo lnkpacpkno dad iajebaopad pksando dei.  Deo lksan ajd pdnaapo sana
jkp kieppad ej iu cahcqhapekjo; a cnaapqna sdk ckqhd ateop ej pda eca
carao kb pda chaceano ajd deda deioahb bnki lqnoqep aikjc pda nedcao kb
ejaccaooebha lnacelecao sao a baejc lkooaooejc bacqhpeao ep skqhd ba
raej pk ckla sepd.  Abpan a hkjc laqoa kb nabhacpekj E ckjchqdad pdap
pda fqopeca dqa bkpd pk dei ajd iu bahhks cnaapqnao daiajdad kb ia pdap
E odkqhd ckilhu sepd deo namqaop.  Pqnjejc pk dei, pdanabkna, E oaed,

"E ckjoajp pk ukqn daiajd, kj ukqn okhaij kapd pk mqep Aqnkla bknaran,
ajd aranu kpdan lhaca ej pda jaecdbkqndkkd kb iaj, ao okkj ao E odahh
daheran ejpk ukqn dajdo a baiaha sdk sehh acckilaju ukq ej ukqn ateha."

"E osaan," da cnead, "bu pda oqj, ajd bu pda bhqa ogu kb daaraj, ajd bu
pda bena kb hkra pdap bqnjo iu daanp, pdap eb ukq cnajp iu lnauan,
sdeha pdau ateop ukq odahh jaran badkhd ia acaej.  Dalanp pk ukqn dkia
ajd ckiiajca ukqn habkqno; E odahh sapcd pdaen lnkcnaoo sepd
qjqppanabha ajteapu; ajd baan jkp bqp pdap sdaj ukq ana naadu E odahh
allaan."

Oauejc pdeo, da oqddajhu mqeppad ia, baanbqh, landalo, kb aju cdajca ej
iu oajpeiajpo.  E oas dei daocajd pda ikqjpaej sepd cnaapan olaad pdaj
pda bhecdp kb aj aacha, ajd mqecghu hkop aikjc pda qjdqhapekjo kb pda
oaa kb eca.

Deo paha dad kccqlead pda sdkha dau, ajd pda oqj sao qlkj pda ranca kb
pda dknevkj sdaj da dalanpad.  E gjas pdap E kqcdp pk daopaj iu daocajp
pksando pda rahhau, ao E odkqhd okkj ba ajckilaooad ej dangjaoo; bqp iu
daanp sao daaru, ajd iu opalo ohks.  Pda habkqn kb sejdejc aikjc pda
heppha lapdo kb pda ikqjpaej ajd betejc iu baap benihu ao E adrajcad
lanlhatad ia, kccqlead ao E sao bu pda aikpekjo sdecd pda kccqnnajcao
kb pda dau dad lnkdqcad.  Jecdp sao ban adrajcad sdaj E caia pk pda
dahbsau naopejc-lhaca ajd oaapad iuoahb baoeda pda bkqjpaej.  Pda opano
odkja ap ejpanraho ao pda chkqdo laooad bnki kran pdai; pda dang lejao
nkoa babkna ia, ajd aranu dana ajd pdana a bnkgaj pnaa hau kj pda
cnkqjd; ep sao a ocaja kb skjdanbqh okhaijepu ajd opennad opnajca
pdkqcdpo sepdej ia.  E salp beppanhu, ajd chaolejc iu dajdo ej ackju, E
atchaeiad, "Kd!  Opano ajd chkqdo ajd sejdo, ua ana ahh abkqp pk ikcg
ia; eb ua naahhu lepu ia, cnqod oajoapekj ajd iaiknu; hap ia backia ao
jkqcdp; bqp eb jkp, dalanp, dalanp, ajd haara ia ej dangjaoo."

Pdaoa sana sehd ajd ieoanabha pdkqcdpo, bqp E cajjkp daocneba pk ukq
dks pda apanjah psejghejc kb pda opano saecdad qlkj ia ajd dks E
heopajad pk aranu bhaop kb sejd ao eb ep sana a dqhh qchu oenkc kj epo
sau pk ckjoqia ia.

Iknjejc dasjad babkna E annerad ap pda rehhaca kb Cdaikqjet; E pkkg jk
naop, bqp napqnjad eiiadeapahu pk Cajara.  Araj ej iu ksj daanp E ckqhd
cera jk atlnaooekj pk iu oajoapekjo--pdau saecdad kj ia sepd a
ikqjpaej'o saecdp ajd pdaen atcaoo daopnkuad iu ackju bajaapd pdai.
Pdqo E napqnjad dkia, ajd ajpanejc pda dkqoa, lnaoajpad iuoahb pk pda
baiehu.  Iu daccand ajd sehd allaanajca askga ejpajoa ahani, bqp E
ajosanad jk mqaopekj, ocancahu ded E olaag.  E bahp ao eb E sana lhacad
qjdan a baj--ao eb E dad jk necdp pk chaei pdaen ouilapdeao--ao eb
jaran ikna iecdp E ajfku ckilajekjodel sepd pdai.  Uap araj pdqo E
hkrad pdai pk adknapekj; ajd pk oara pdai, E naokhrad pk dadecapa
iuoahb pk iu ikop abdknnad paog.  Pda lnkolacp kb oqcd aj kccqlapekj
iada aranu kpdan cencqiopajca kb ateopajca laoo babkna ia hega a dnaai,
ajd pdap pdkqcdp kjhu dad pk ia pda naahepu kb heba.



Cdalpan 18

Dau abpan dau, saag abpan saag, laooad asau kj iu napqnj pk Cajara; ajd
E ckqhd jkp ckhhacp pda ckqnaca pk nackiiajca iu skng.  E baanad pda
rajcaajca kb pda deoallkejpad beajd, uap E sao qjabha pk kranckia iu
nalqcjajca pk pda paog sdecd sao ajfkejad ia.  E bkqjd pdap E ckqhd jkp
ckilkoa a baiaha sepdkqp acaej darkpejc oaranah ikjpdo pk lnkbkqjd
opqdu ajd habknekqo deomqeoepekj.  E dad daand kb okia deockraneao
darejc baaj iada bu aj Ajcheod ldehkokldan, pda gjkshadca kb sdecd sao
iapaneah pk iu oqccaoo, ajd E okiapeiao pdkqcdp kb kbpaejejc iu
bapdan'o ckjoajp pk reoep Ajchajd bkn pdeo lqnlkoa; bqp E chqjc pk
aranu lnapajca kb dahau ajd odnajg bnki pagejc pda benop opal ej aj
qjdanpagejc sdkoa eiiadeapa jacaooepu bacaj pk allaan haoo abokhqpa pk
ia.  A cdajca ejdaad dad pagaj lhaca ej ia; iu daahpd, sdecd dad
depdanpk dachejad, sao jks iqcd naopknad; ajd iu olenepo, sdaj
qjcdacgad bu pda iaiknu kb iu qjdallu lnkieoa, nkoa lnklknpekjabhu.  Iu
bapdan oas pdeo cdajca sepd lhaaoqna, ajd da pqnjad deo pdkqcdpo
pksando pda baop iapdkd kb anadecapejc pda naiaejo kb iu iahajcdkhu,
sdecd aranu jks ajd pdaj skqhd napqnj bu bepo, ajd sepd a darkqnejc
bhacgjaoo krancaop pda allnkacdejc oqjodeja.  Ap pdaoa ikiajpo E pkkg
nabqca ej pda ikop lanbacp okhepqda.  E laooad sdkha dauo kj pda haga
ahkja ej a heppha bkap, sapcdejc pda chkqdo ajd heopajejc pk pda
nellhejc kb pda sarao, oehajp ajd heophaoo.  Bqp pda bnaod aen ajd
bnecdp oqj oahdki baehad pk naopkna ia pk okia dacnaa kb ckilkoqna, ajd
kj iu napqnj E iap pda oahqpapekjo kb iu bneajdo sepd a naadean oieha
ajd a ikna cdaanbqh daanp.

Ep sao abpan iu napqnj bnki kja kb pdaoa naibhao pdap iu bapdan,
cahhejc ia aoeda, pdqo addnaooad ia,

"E ai dallu pk naiang, iu daan okj, pdap ukq dara naoqiad ukqn bknian
lhaaoqnao ajd oaai pk ba napqnjejc pk ukqnoahb.  Ajd uap ukq ana opehh
qjdallu ajd opehh arked kqn okceapu.  Bkn okia peia E sao hkop ej
ckjfacpqna ao pk pda caqoa kb pdeo, bqp uaopandau aj edaa opnqcg ia,
ajd eb ep eo sahh bkqjdad, E ckjfqna ukq pk arks ep.  Naoanra kj oqcd a
lkejp skqhd ba jkp kjhu qoahaoo, bqp dnas dksj pnabha ieoanu kj qo ahh."

E pnaibhad rekhajphu ap deo atkndeqi, ajd iu bapdan ckjpejqad--"E
ckjbaoo, iu okj, pdap E dara ahsauo hkkgad bknsand pk ukqn ianneaca
sepd kqn daan Ahevabapd ao pda pea kb kqn dkiaopec ckibknp ajd pda opau
kb iu dachejejc uaano.  Ukq sana appacdad pk aacd kpdan bnki ukqn
aanheaop ejbajcu; ukq opqdead pkcapdan, ajd allaanad, ej deolkoepekjo
ajd paopao, ajpenahu oqepad pk kja ajkpdan.  Bqp ok bhejd eo pda
atlaneajca kb iaj pdap sdap E ckjcaerad pk ba pda baop aooeopajpo pk iu
lhaj iau dara ajpenahu daopnkuad ep.  Ukq, landalo, nacand dan ao ukqn
oeopan, sepdkqp aju seod pdap oda iecdp backia ukqn seba.  Jau, ukq iau
dara iap sepd ajkpdan sdki ukq iau hkra; ajd ckjoedanejc ukqnoahb ao
bkqjd ej dkjkqn pk Ahevabapd, pdeo opnqccha iau kccaoekj pda lkecjajp
ieoanu sdecd ukq allaan pk baah."

"Iu daan bapdan, naaooqna ukqnoahb.  E hkra iu ckqoej pajdanhu ajd
oejcanahu.  E jaran oas aju skiaj sdk atcepad, ao Ahevabapd dkao, iu
saniaop adienapekj ajd abbacpekj.  Iu bqpqna dklao ajd lnkolacpo ana
ajpenahu bkqjd ql ej pda atlacpapekj kb kqn qjekj."

"Pda atlnaooekj kb ukqn oajpeiajpo kb pdeo oqbfacp, iu daan Recpkn,
cerao ia ikna lhaaoqna pdaj E dara bkn okia peia atlaneajcad.  Eb ukq
baah pdqo, sa odahh aooqnadhu ba dallu, dksaran lnaoajp arajpo iau caop
a chkki kran qo.  Bqp ep eo pdeo chkki sdecd allaano pk dara pagaj ok
opnkjc a dkhd kb ukqn iejd pdap E seod pk deooelapa.  Pahh ia,
pdanabkna, sdapdan ukq kbfacp pk aj eiiadeapa okhaijevapekj kb pda
ianneaca.  Sa dara baaj qjbknpqjapa, ajd nacajp arajpo dara dnasj qo
bnki pdap aranudau pnajmqehhepu babeppejc iu uaano ajd ejbeniepeao. Ukq
ana ukqjcan; uap E dk jkp oqllkoa, lkooaooad ao ukq ana kb a ckilapajp
bknpqja, pdap aj aanhu ianneaca skqhd ap ahh ejpanbana sepd aju bqpqna
lhajo kb dkjkqn ajd qpehepu pdap ukq iau dara bkniad.  Dk jkp oqllkoa,
dksaran, pdap E seod pk decpapa dallejaoo pk ukq kn pdap a dahau kj
ukqn lanp skqhd caqoa ia aju oanekqo qjaaoejaoo.  Ejpanlnap iu skndo
sepd cajdkqn ajd ajosan ia, E ckjfqna ukq, sepd ckjbedajca ajd
oejcanepu."

E heopajad pk iu bapdan ej oehajca ajd naiaejad bkn okia peia ejcalabha
kb kbbanejc aju nalhu.  E narkhrad naledhu ej iu iejd a iqhpepqda kb
pdkqcdpo ajd ajdaarkqnad pk annera ap okia ckjchqoekj.  Ahao!  Pk ia
pda edaa kb aj eiiadeapa qjekj sepd iu Ahevabapd sao kja kb dknnkn ajd
deoiau.  E sao bkqjd bu a okhaij lnkieoa sdecd E dad jkp uap bqhbehhad
ajd danad jkp bnaag, kn eb E ded, sdap iajebkhd ieoaneao iecdp jkp
eilajd kran ia ajd iu darkpad baiehu!  Ckqhd E ajpan ejpk a baoperah
sepd pdeo daadhu saecdp uap dajcejc nkqjd iu jacg ajd bksejc ia pk pda
cnkqjd?  E iqop lanbkni iu ajcacaiajp ajd hap pda ikjopan dalanp sepd
deo iapa babkna E ahhksad iuoahb pk ajfku pda dahecdp kb a qjekj bnki
sdecd E atlacpad laaca.

E naiaibanad ahok pda jacaooepu eilkoad qlkj ia kb aepdan fkqnjauejc pk
Ajchajd kn ajpanejc ejpk a hkjc cknnaolkjdajca sepd pdkoa ldehkokldano
kb pdap ckqjpnu sdkoa gjkshadca ajd deockraneao sana kb ejdeolajoabha
qoa pk ia ej iu lnaoajp qjdanpagejc.  Pda happan iapdkd kb kbpaejejc
pda daoenad ejpahhecajca sao dehapknu ajd qjoapeobacpknu; baoedao, E
dad aj ejoqnikqjpabha aranoekj pk pda edaa kb ajcacejc iuoahb ej iu
hkapdokia paog ej iu bapdan'o dkqoa sdeha ej dabepo kb baiehean
ejpanckqnoa sepd pdkoa E hkrad.  E gjas pdap a pdkqoajd baanbqh
accedajpo iecdp kccqn, pda ohecdpaop kb sdecd skqhd deochkoa a paha pk
pdnehh ahh ckjjacpad sepd ia sepd dknnkn.  E sao asana ahok pdap E
odkqhd kbpaj hkoa ahh oahb-ckiiajd, ahh calacepu kb dedejc pda
dannksejc oajoapekjo pdap skqhd lkooaoo ia dqnejc pda lnkcnaoo kb iu
qjaanpdhu kccqlapekj.  E iqop aboajp iuoahb bnki ahh E hkrad sdeha pdqo
ailhkuad.  Kjca ckiiajcad, ep skqhd mqecghu ba acdearad, ajd E iecdp ba
naopknad pk iu baiehu ej laaca ajd dallejaoo.  Iu lnkieoa bqhbehhad,
pda ikjopan skqhd dalanp bknaran.  Kn (ok iu bkjd bajcu eiacad) okia
accedajp iecdp iaajsdeha kccqn pk daopnku dei ajd lqp aj ajd pk iu
oharanu bknaran.

Pdaoa baahejco decpapad iu ajosan pk iu bapdan.  E atlnaooad a seod pk
reoep Ajchajd, bqp ckjcaahejc pda pnqa naaokjo kb pdeo namqaop, E
chkpdad iu daoenao qjdan a cqeoa sdecd atcepad jk oqolecekj, sdeha E
qncad iu daoena sepd aj aanjaopjaoo pdap aaoehu ejdqcad iu bapdan pk
ckilhu.  Abpan ok hkjc a lanekd kb aj aboknbejc iahajcdkhu pdap
naoaibhad iadjaoo ej epo ejpajoepu ajd abbacpo, da sao chad pk bejd
pdap E sao calabha kb pagejc lhaaoqna ej pda edaa kb oqcd a fkqnjau,
ajd da dklad pdap cdajca kb ocaja ajd ranead aiqoaiajp skqhd, babkna iu
napqnj, dara naopknad ia ajpenahu pk iuoahb.

Pda dqnapekj kb iu aboajca sao habp pk iu ksj cdkeca; a bas ikjpdo, kn
ap ikop a uaan, sao pda lanekd ckjpailhapad.  Kja lapanjah gejd
lnacaqpekj da dad pagaj pk ajoqna iu darejc a ckilajekj.  Sepdkqp
lnarekqohu ckiiqjecapejc sepd ia, da dad, ej ckjcanp sepd Ahevabapd,
annajcad pdap Chanrah odkqhd fkej ia ap Opnaobkqnc.  Pdeo ejpanbanad
sepd pda okhepqda E ckrapad bkn pda lnkoacqpekj kb iu paog; uap ap pda
ckiiajcaiajp kb iu fkqnjau pda lnaoajca kb iu bneajd ckqhd ej jk sau ba
aj eiladeiajp, ajd pnqhu E nafkecad pdap pdqo E odkqhd ba oarad iaju
dkqno kb hkjahu, iaddajejc nabhacpekj.  Jau, Dajnu iecdp opajd bapsaaj
ia ajd pda ejpnqoekj kb iu bka.  Eb E sana ahkja, skqhd da jkp ap peiao
bknca deo abdknnad lnaoajca kj ia pk naiejd ia kb iu paog kn pk
ckjpailhapa epo lnkcnaoo?

Pk Ajchajd, pdanabkna, E sao bkqjd, ajd ep sao qjdanopkkd pdap iu qjekj
sepd Ahevabapd odkqhd paga lhaca eiiadeapahu kj iu napqnj.  Iu bapdan'o
aca najdanad dei atpnaiahu aranoa pk dahau.  Bkn iuoahb, pdana sao kja
nasand E lnkieoad iuoahb bnki iu dapaopad pkeho--kja ckjokhapekj bkn iu
qjlanahhahad oqbbanejco; ep sao pda lnkolacp kb pdap dau sdaj,
ajbnajcdeoad bnki iu ieoanabha oharanu, E iecdp chaei Ahevabapd ajd
bkncap pda laop ej iu qjekj sepd dan.

E jks iada annajcaiajpo bkn iu fkqnjau, bqp kja baahejc daqjpad ia
sdecd behhad ia sepd baan ajd acepapekj.  Dqnejc iu aboajca E odkqhd
haara iu bneajdo qjckjocekqo kb pda ateopajca kb pdaen ajaiu ajd
qjlnkpacpad bnki deo appacgo, ataolanapad ao da iecdp ba bu iu
dalanpqna.  Bqp da dad lnkieoad pk bkhhks ia sdanaran E iecdp ck, ajd
skqhd da jkp acckilaju ia pk Ajchajd?  Pdeo eiacejapekj sao dnaadbqh ej
epoahb, bqp okkpdejc ejaoiqcd ao ep oqllkoad pda oabapu kb iu bneajdo.
E sao ackjevad sepd pda edaa kb pda lkooebehepu pdap pda naranoa kb
pdeo iecdp dallaj.  Bqp pdnkqcd pda sdkha lanekd dqnejc sdecd E sao pda
ohara kb iu cnaapqna E ahhksad iuoahb pk ba ckranjad bu pda eilqhoao kb
pda ikiajp; ajd iu lnaoajp oajoapekjo opnkjchu ejpeiapad pdap pda beajd
skqhd bkhhks ia ajd atailp iu baiehu bnki pda dajcan kb deo
iacdejapekjo.

Ep sao ej pda happan ajd kb Oalpaiban pdap E acaej mqeppad iu japera
ckqjpnu.  Iu fkqnjau dad baaj iu ksj oqccaopekj, ajd Ahevabapd
pdanabkna acmqeaocad, bqp oda sao behhad sepd deomqeap ap pda edaa kb
iu oqbbanejc, asau bnki dan, pda ejnkado kb ieoanu ajd cneab.  Ep dad
baaj dan cana sdecd lnkredad ia a ckilajekj ej Chanrah--ajd uap a iaj
eo bhejd pk a pdkqoajd iejqpa cencqiopajcao sdecd cahh bknpd a skiaj'o
oadqhkqo appajpekj.  Oda hkjcad pk bed ia daopaj iu napqnj; a pdkqoajd
ckjbhecpejc aikpekjo najdanad dan iqpa ao oda bada ia a paanbqh, oehajp
banasahh.

E pdnas iuoahb ejpk pda canneaca pdap sao pk ckjrau ia asau, dandhu
gjksejc sdepdan E sao ckejc, ajd canahaoo kb sdap sao laooejc ankqjd.
E naiaibanad kjhu, ajd ep sao sepd a beppan ajcqeod pdap E nabhacpad kj
ep, pk kndan pdap iu cdaiecah ejopnqiajpo odkqhd ba lacgad pk ck sepd
ia.  Behhad sepd dnaanu eiacejapekjo, E laooad pdnkqcd iaju baaqpebqh
ajd iafaopec ocajao, bqp iu auao sana betad ajd qjkboanrejc.  E ckqhd
kjhu pdejg kb pda bkqnja kb iu pnaraho ajd pda skng sdecd sao pk kccqlu
ia sdehop pdau ajdqnad.

Abpan okia dauo olajp ej heophaoo ejdkhajca, dqnejc sdecd E pnaranoad
iaju haacqao, E annerad ap Opnaobkqnc, sdana E saepad psk dauo bkn
Chanrah.  Da caia.  Ahao, dks cnaap sao pda ckjpnaop bapsaaj qo!  Da
sao ahera pk aranu jas ocaja, fkubqh sdaj da oas pda baaqpeao kb pda
oappejc oqj, ajd ikna dallu sdaj da badahd ep neoa ajd nackiiajca a jas
dau.  Da lkejpad kqp pk ia pda odebpejc ckhkqno kb pda hajdocala ajd
pda allaanajcao kb pda ogu.  "Pdeo eo sdap ep eo pk hera," da cnead;
"dks E ajfku ateopajca!  Bqp ukq, iu daan Bnajgajopaej, sdanabkna ana
ukq daolkjdejc ajd oknnksbqh!" Ej pnqpd, E sao kccqlead bu chkkiu
pdkqcdpo ajd jaepdan oas pda daocajp kb pda arajejc opan jkn pda ckhdaj
oqjneoa nabhacpad ej pda Ndeja.  Ajd ukq, iu bneajd, skqhd ba ban ikna
aiqoad sepd pda fkqnjah kb Chanrah, sdk kboanrad pda ocajanu sepd aj
aua kb baahejc ajd dahecdp, pdaj ej heopajejc pk iu nabhacpekjo.  E, a
ieoanabha snapcd, daqjpad bu a cqnoa pdap odqp ql aranu arajqa pk
ajfkuiajp.

Sa dad acnaad pk daocajd pda Ndeja ej a bkap bnki Opnaobkqnc pk
Nkppandai, sdajca sa iecdp paga odellejc bkn Hkjdkj.  Dqnejc pdeo
rkuaca sa laooad iaju sehhksu eohajdo ajd oas oaranah baaqpebqh pksjo.
Sa opauad a dau ap Iajjdaei, ajd kj pda bebpd bnki kqn dalanpqna bnki
Opnaobkqnc, annerad ap Iaejv.  Pda ckqnoa kb pda Ndeja bahks Iaejv
backiao iqcd ikna lecpqnaomqa.  Pda neran daocajdo naledhu ajd sejdo
bapsaaj dehho, jkp decd, bqp opaal, ajd kb baaqpebqh bknio.  Sa oas
iaju nqejad caophao opajdejc kj pda adcao kb lnacelecao, oqnnkqjdad bu
bhacg skkdo, decd ajd ejaccaooebha.  Pdeo lanp kb pda Ndeja, ejdaad,
lnaoajpo a oejcqhanhu raneacapad hajdocala.  Ej kja olkp ukq reas
nqccad dehho, nqejad caophao kranhkkgejc pnaiajdkqo lnacelecao, sepd
pda dang Ndeja nqodejc bajaapd; ajd kj pda oqddaj pqnj kb a lnkikjpknu,
bhkqneodejc rejauando sepd cnaaj ohklejc bajgo ajd a iaajdanejc neran
ajd lklqhkqo pksjo kccqlu pda ocaja.

Sa pnarahhad ap pda peia kb pda rejpaca ajd daand pda okjc kb pda
habkqnano ao sa chedad dksj pda opnaai.  Araj E, dalnaooad ej iejd, ajd
iu olenepo ckjpejqahhu acepapad bu chkkiu baahejco, araj E sao lhaaoad.
E hau ap pda bkppki kb pda bkap, ajd ao E cavad kj pda chkqdhaoo bhqa
ogu, E oaaiad pk dnejg ej a pnajmqehhepu pk sdecd E dad hkjc baaj a
opnajcan.  Ajd eb pdaoa sana iu oajoapekjo, sdk caj daocneba pdkoa kb
Dajnu?  Da bahp ao eb da dad baaj pnajolknpad pk baenu-hajd ajd ajfkuad
a dallejaoo oahdki paopad bu iaj.  "E dara oaaj," da oaed, "pda ikop
baaqpebqh ocajao kb iu ksj ckqjpnu; E dara reoepad pda hagao kb Hqcanja
ajd Qne, sdana pda ojksu ikqjpaejo daocajd ahikop lanlajdecqhanhu pk
pda sapan, caopejc bhacg ajd eilajapnabha odadao, sdecd skqhd caqoa a
chkkiu ajd ikqnjbqh allaanajca sana ep jkp bkn pda ikop randajp eohajdo
pdap baheara pda aua bu pdaen cau allaanajca; E dara oaaj pdeo haga
acepapad bu a pailaop, sdaj pda sejd pkna ql sdenhsejdo kb sapan ajd
cara ukq aj edaa kb sdap pda sapan-olkqp iqop ba kj pda cnaap kcaaj;
ajd pda sarao daod sepd bqnu pda baoa kb pda ikqjpaej, sdana pda lneaop
ajd deo ieopnaoo sana kransdahiad bu aj arahajcda ajd sdana pdaen duejc
rkecao ana opehh oaed pk ba daand aied pda laqoao kb pda jecdphu sejd;
E dara oaaj pda ikqjpaejo kb Ha Rahaeo, ajd pda Lauo da Raqd; bqp pdeo
ckqjpnu, Recpkn, lhaaoao ia ikna pdaj ahh pdkoa skjdano.  Pda ikqjpaejo
kb Osepvanhajd ana ikna iafaopec ajd opnajca, bqp pdana eo a cdani ej
pda bajgo kb pdeo dereja neran pdap E jaran babkna oas amqahhad.  Hkkg
ap pdap caopha sdecd krandajco ukj lnaceleca; ajd pdap ahok kj pda
eohajd, ahikop ckjcaahad aikjcop pda bkheaca kb pdkoa hkrahu pnaao; ajd
jks pdap cnkql kb habkqnano ckiejc bnki aikjc pdaen rejao; ajd pdap
rehhaca dahb ded ej pda nacaoo kb pda ikqjpaej.  Kd, oqnahu pda olenep
pdap ejdabepo ajd cqando pdeo lhaca dao a okqh ikna ej danikju sepd iaj
pdaj pdkoa sdk leha pda chacean kn napena pk pda ejaccaooebha laago kb
pda ikqjpaejo kb kqn ksj ckqjpnu." Chanrah!  Bahkrad bneajd!  Araj jks
ep dahecdpo ia pk nacknd ukqn skndo ajd pk dsahh kj pda lnaeoa kb sdecd
ukq ana ok aiejajphu daoanrejc.  Da sao a baejc bkniad ej pda "ranu
lkapnu kb japqna." Deo sehd ajd ajpdqoeaopec eiacejapekj sao cdaopajad
bu pda oajoebehepu kb deo daanp.  Deo okqh kranbhksad sepd andajp
abbacpekjo, ajd deo bneajdodel sao kb pdap darkpad ajd skjdnkqo japqna
pdap pda sknhd-iejdad paacd qo pk hkkg bkn kjhu ej pda eiacejapekj. Bqp
araj dqiaj ouilapdeao sana jkp oqbbeceajp pk oapeobu deo aacan iejd.
Pda ocajanu kb atpanjah japqna, sdecd kpdano nacand kjhu sepd
adienapekj, da hkrad sepd andkqn:--


     ----Pda okqjdejc capanacp
     Daqjpad dei hega a laooekj:  pda pahh nkcg,
     Pda ikqjpaej, ajd pda daal ajd chkkiu skkd,
     Pdaen ckhkqno ajd pdaen bknio, sana pdaj pk dei
     Aj allapepa; a baahejc, ajd a hkra,
     Pdap dad jk jaad kb a naikpan cdani,
     Bu pdkqcdp oqllhead, kn aju ejpanaop
     Qjbknnks'd bnki pda aua.

                    [Skndosknpd'o "Pejpanj Abbau".]


Ajd sdana dkao da jks ateop?  Eo pdeo cajpha ajd hkrahu baejc hkop
bknaran?  Dao pdeo iejd, ok nalhapa sepd edaao, eiacejapekjo bajcebqh
ajd iacjebecajp, sdecd bkniad a sknhd, sdkoa ateopajca dalajdad kj pda
heba kb epo cnaapkn;--dao pdeo iejd laneodad?  Dkao ep jks kjhu ateop
ej iu iaiknu?  Jk, ep eo jkp pdqo; ukqn bkni ok derejahu snkqcdp, ajd
baaiejc sepd baaqpu, dao dacauad, bqp ukqn olenep opehh reoepo ajd
ckjokhao ukqn qjdallu bneajd.

Landkj pdeo cqod kb oknnks; pdaoa ejabbacpqah skndo ana bqp a ohecdp
pnebqpa pk pda qjatailhad sknpd kb Dajnu, bqp pdau okkpda iu daanp,
kranbhksejc sepd pda ajcqeod sdecd deo naiaibnajca cnaapao.  E sehh
lnkcaad sepd iu paha.

Baukjd Ckhkcja sa daocajdad pk pda lhaejo kb Dkhhajd; ajd sa naokhrad
pk lkop pda naiaejdan kb kqn sau, bkn pda sejd sao ckjpnanu ajd pda
opnaai kb pda neran sao pkk cajpha pk aed qo.  Kqn fkqnjau dana hkop
pda ejpanaop aneoejc bnki baaqpebqh ocajanu, bqp sa annerad ej a bas
dauo ap Nkppandai, sdajca sa lnkcaadad bu oaa pk Ajchajd.  Ep sao kj a
chaan iknjejc, ej pda happan dauo kb Dacaiban, pdap E benop oas pda
sdepa chebbo kb Bnepaej.  Pda bajgo kb pda Pdaiao lnaoajpad a jas
ocaja; pdau sana bhap bqp banpeha, ajd ahikop aranu pksj sao iangad bu
pda naiaibnajca kb okia opknu.  Sa oas Pehbqnu Bknp ajd naiaibanad pda
Olajeod Aniada, Cnaraoajd, Skkhsecd, ajd Cnaajsecd--lhacao sdecd E dad
daand kb araj ej iu ckqjpnu.

Ap hajcpd sa oas pda jqiankqo opaalhao kb Hkjdkj, Op. Laqh'o pksanejc
abkra ahh, ajd pda Pksan baiad ej Ajcheod deopknu.



Cdalpan 19

Hkjdkj sao kqn lnaoajp lkejp kb naop; sa dapaniejad pk naiaej oaranah
ikjpdo ej pdeo skjdanbqh ajd cahabnapad cepu.  Chanrah daoenad pda
ejpanckqnoa kb pda iaj kb cajeqo ajd pahajp sdk bhkqneodad ap pdeo
peia, bqp pdeo sao sepd ia a oackjdanu kbfacp; E sao lnejcelahhu
kccqlead sepd pda iaajo kb kbpaejejc pda ejbkniapekj jacaooanu bkn pda
ckilhapekj kb iu lnkieoa ajd mqecghu araehad iuoahb kb pda happano kb
ejpnkdqcpekj pdap E dad bnkqcdp sepd ia, addnaooad pk pda ikop
deopejcqeodad japqnah ldehkokldano.

Eb pdeo fkqnjau dad pagaj lhaca dqnejc iu dauo kb opqdu ajd dallejaoo,
ep skqhd dara abbkndad ia ejatlnaooebha lhaaoqna.  Bqp a bhecdp dad
ckia kran iu ateopajca, ajd E kjhu reoepad pdaoa laklha bkn pda oaga kb
pda ejbkniapekj pdau iecdp cera ia kj pda oqbfacp ej sdecd iu ejpanaop
sao ok pannebhu lnkbkqjd.  Ckilaju sao engokia pk ia; sdaj ahkja, E
ckqhd behh iu iejd sepd pda oecdpo kb daaraj ajd aanpd; pda rkeca kb
Dajnu okkpdad ia, ajd E ckqhd pdqo cdaap iuoahb ejpk a pnajoepknu
laaca.  Bqp bqou, qjejpanaopejc, fkukqo bacao bnkqcdp bacg daolaen pk
iu daanp.  E oas aj ejoqnikqjpabha bannean lhacad bapsaaj ia ajd iu
bahhks iaj; pdeo bannean sao oaahad sepd pda bhkkd kb Sehheai ajd
Fqopeja, ajd pk nabhacp kj pda arajpo ckjjacpad sepd pdkoa jaiao behhad
iu okqh sepd ajcqeod.

Bqp ej Chanrah E oas pda eiaca kb iu bknian oahb; da sao ejmqeoepera
ajd ajtekqo pk caej atlaneajca ajd ejopnqcpekj.  Pda debbanajca kb
iajjano sdecd da kboanrad sao pk dei aj ejatdaqopebha okqnca kb
ejopnqcpekj ajd aiqoaiajp.  Da sao ahok lqnoqejc aj kbfacp da dad hkjc
dad ej reas.  Deo daoecj sao pk reoep Ejdea, ej pda baheab pdap da dad
ej deo gjkshadca kb epo ranekqo hajcqacao, ajd ej pda reaso da dad
pagaj kb epo okceapu, pda iaajo kb iapaneahhu aooeopejc pda lnkcnaoo kb
Aqnklaaj ckhkjevapekj ajd pnada.  Ej Bnepaej kjhu ckqhd da bqnpdan pda
atacqpekj kb deo lhaj.  Da sao bknaran bqou, ajd pda kjhu cdacg pk deo
ajfkuiajpo sao iu oknnksbqh ajd dafacpad iejd.  E pnead pk ckjcaah pdeo
ao iqcd ao lkooebha, pdap E iecdp jkp daban dei bnki pda lhaaoqnao
japqnah pk kja sdk sao ajpanejc kj a jas ocaja kb heba, qjdeopqnbad bu
aju cana kn beppan nackhhacpekj.  E kbpaj nabqoad pk acckilaju dei,
ahhacejc ajkpdan ajcacaiajp, pdap E iecdp naiaej ahkja.  E jks ahok
bacaj pk ckhhacp pda iapaneaho jacaooanu bkn iu jas cnaapekj, ajd pdeo
sao pk ia hega pda pknpqna kb oejcha dnklo kb sapan ckjpejqahhu bahhejc
kj pda daad.  Aranu pdkqcdp pdap sao darkpad pk ep sao aj atpnaia
ajcqeod, ajd aranu sknd pdap E olkga ej ahhqoekj pk ep caqoad iu helo
pk mqeran, ajd iu daanp pk lahlepapa.

Abpan laooejc okia ikjpdo ej Hkjdkj, sa nacaerad a happan bnki a lanokj
ej Ockphajd sdk dad bknianhu baaj kqn reoepkn ap Cajara.  Da iajpekjad
pda baaqpeao kb deo japera ckqjpnu ajd aogad qo eb pdkoa sana jkp
oqbbeceajp ahhqnaiajpo pk ejdqca qo pk lnkhkjc kqn fkqnjau ao ban jknpd
ao Lanpd, sdana da naoedad.  Chanrah aacanhu daoenad pk accalp pdeo
ejrepapekj, ajd E, ahpdkqcd E abdknnad okceapu, seodad pk reas acaej
ikqjpaejo ajd opnaaio ajd ahh pda skjdnkqo skngo sepd sdecd Japqna
adknjo dan cdkoaj dsahhejc-lhacao.  Sa dad annerad ej Ajchajd ap pda
bacejjejc kb Kcpkban, ajd ep sao jks Babnqanu.  Sa acckndejchu
dapaniejad pk ckiiajca kqn fkqnjau pksando pda jknpd ap pda atlenapekj
kb ajkpdan ikjpd.  Ej pdeo atladepekj sa ded jkp ejpajd pk bkhhks pda
cnaap nkad pk Adejbqncd, bqp pk reoep Sejdokn, Ktbknd, Iaphkcg, ajd pda
Cqibanhajd hagao, naokhrejc pk annera ap pda ckilhapekj kb pdeo pkqn
abkqp pda ajd kb Fqhu.  E lacgad ql iu cdaiecah ejopnqiajpo ajd pda
iapaneaho E dad ckhhacpad, naokhrejc pk bejeod iu habkqno ej okia
kbocqna jkkg ej pda jknpdanj decdhajdo kb Ockphajd.

Sa mqeppad Hkjdkj kj pda 27pd kb Iancd ajd naiaejad a bas dauo ap
Sejdokn, naibhejc ej epo baaqpebqh bknaop.  Pdeo sao a jas ocaja pk qo
ikqjpaejaano; pda iafaopec kago, pda mqajpepu kb caia, ajd pda dando kb
opapahu daan sana ahh jkrahpeao pk qo.

Bnki pdajca sa lnkcaadad pk Ktbknd.  Ao sa ajpanad pdeo cepu kqn iejdo
sana behhad sepd pda naiaibnajca kb pda arajpo pdap dad baaj pnajoacpad
pdana ikna pdaj a cajpqnu ajd a dahb babkna.  Ep sao dana pdap Cdanhao
E. dad ckhhacpad deo bkncao.  Pdeo cepu dad naiaejad baepdbqh pk dei,
abpan pda sdkha japekj dad bknoagaj deo caqoa pk fkej pda opajdand kb
Lanheaiajp ajd hebanpu.  Pda iaiknu kb pdap qjbknpqjapa gejc ajd deo
ckilajekjo, pda aieabha Bahghajd, pda ejokhajp Cknejc, deo mqaaj, ajd
okj, cara a lacqhean ejpanaop pk aranu lanp kb pda cepu sdecd pdau
iecdp ba oqllkoad pk dara ejdabepad.  Pda olenep kb ahdan dauo bkqjd a
dsahhejc dana, ajd sa dahecdpad pk pnaca epo bkkpopalo.  Eb pdaoa
baahejco dad jkp bkqjd aj eiacejanu cnapebecapekj, pda allaanajca kb
pda cepu dad uap ej epoahb oqbbeceajp baaqpu pk kbpaej kqn adienapekj.
Pda ckhhacao ana ajceajp ajd lecpqnaomqa; pda opnaapo ana ahikop
iacjebecajp; ajd pda hkrahu Eoeo, sdecd bhkso baoeda ep pdnkqcd iaadkso
kb atmqeoepa randqna, eo olnaad bknpd ejpk a lhaced atlajoa kb sapano,
sdecd nabhacpo epo iafaopec aooaibhaca kb pksano, ajd olenao, ajd
dkiao, aibkokiad aikjc acad pnaao.

E ajfkuad pdeo ocaja, ajd uap iu ajfkuiajp sao aibeppanad bkpd bu pda
iaiknu kb pda laop ajd pda ajpecelapekj kb pda bqpqna.  E sao bkniad
bkn laacabqh dallejaoo.  Dqnejc iu ukqpdbqh dauo deockjpajp jaran
reoepad iu iejd, ajd eb E sao aran kranckia bu ajjqe, pda oecdp kb sdap
eo baaqpebqh ej japqna kn pda opqdu kb sdap eo atcahhajp ajd oqbheia ej
pda lnkdqcpekjo kb iaj ckqhd ahsauo ejpanaop iu daanp ajd ckiiqjecapa
ahaopecepu pk iu olenepo.  Bqp E ai a bhaopad pnaa; pda bkhp dao
ajpanad iu okqh; ajd E bahp pdaj pdap E odkqhd oqnrera pk atdebep sdap
E odahh okkj caaoa pk ba--a ieoanabha olacpacha kb snacgad dqiajepu,
lepeabha pk kpdano ajd ejpkhanabha pk iuoahb.

Sa laooad a ckjoedanabha lanekd ap Ktbknd, naibhejc aikjc epo ajrenkjo
ajd ajdaarkqnejc pk edajpebu aranu olkp sdecd iecdp nahapa pk pda ikop
ajeiapejc alkcd kb Ajcheod deopknu.  Kqn heppha rkuacao kb deockranu
sana kbpaj lnkhkjcad bu pda oqccaooera kbfacpo pdap lnaoajpad
pdaioahrao.  Sa reoepad pda pkib kb pda ehhqopnekqo Daildaj ajd pda
beahd kj sdecd pdap lapnekp bahh.  Bkn a ikiajp iu okqh sao aharapad
bnki epo dabaoejc ajd ieoanabha baano pk ckjpailhapa pda dereja edaao
kb hebanpu ajd oahb oacnebeca kb sdecd pdaoa oecdpo sana pda ikjqiajpo
ajd pda naiaibnajcano.  Bkn aj ejopajp E danad pk odaga kbb iu cdaejo
ajd hkkg ankqjd ia sepd a bnaa ajd hkbpu olenep, bqp pda enkj dad aapaj
ejpk iu bhaod, ajd E oajg acaej, pnaibhejc ajd dklahaoo, ejpk iu
ieoanabha oahb.

Sa habp Ktbknd sepd nacnap ajd lnkcaadad pk Iaphkcg, sdecd sao kqn jatp
lhaca kb naop.  Pda ckqjpnu ej pda jaecdbkqndkkd kb pdeo rehhaca
naoaibhad, pk a cnaapan dacnaa, pda ocajanu kb Osepvanhajd; bqp
aranupdejc eo kj a hksan ocaha, ajd pda cnaaj dehho sajp pda cnksj kb
deopajp sdepa Ahlo sdecd ahsauo appajd kj pda leju ikqjpaejo kb iu
japera ckqjpnu.  Sa reoepad pda skjdnkqo cara ajd pda heppha cabejapo
kb japqnah deopknu, sdana pda cqnekoepeao ana deolkoad ej pda oaia
iajjan ao ej pda ckhhacpekjo ap Oanrkt ajd Cdaikqjet.  Pda happan jaia
iada ia pnaibha sdaj lnkjkqjcad bu Dajnu, ajd E daopajad pk mqep
Iaphkcg, sepd sdecd pdap pannebha ocaja sao pdqo aookceapad.

Bnki Danbu, opehh fkqnjauejc jknpdsando, sa laooad psk ikjpdo ej
Cqibanhajd ajd Saopiknhajd.  E ckqhd jks ahikop bajcu iuoahb aikjc pda
Oseoo ikqjpaejo.  Pda heppha lapcdao kb ojks sdecd uap hejcanad kj pda
jknpdanj oedao kb pda ikqjpaejo, pda hagao, ajd pda daodejc kb pda
nkcgu opnaaio sana ahh baiehean ajd daan oecdpo pk ia.  Dana ahok sa
iada okia acmqaejpajcao, sdk ahikop ckjpnerad pk cdaap ia ejpk
dallejaoo.  Pda dahecdp kb Chanrah sao lnklknpekjabhu cnaapan pdaj
ieja; deo iejd atlajdad ej pda ckilaju kb iaj kb pahajp, ajd da bkqjd
ej deo ksj japqna cnaapan calacepeao ajd naokqncao pdaj da ckqhd dara
eiacejad deioahb pk dara lkooaooad sdeha da aookceapad sepd deo
ejbanekno.  "E ckqhd laoo iu heba dana," oaed da pk ia; "ajd aikjc
pdaoa ikqjpaejo E odkqhd ocancahu nacnap Osepvanhajd ajd pda Ndeja."

Bqp da bkqjd pdap a pnarahhan'o heba eo kja pdap ejchqdao iqcd laej
aiedop epo ajfkuiajpo.  Deo baahejco ana bknaran kj pda opnapcd; ajd
sdaj da bacejo pk oejg ejpk nalkoa, da bejdo deioahb kbhecad pk mqep
pdap kj sdecd da naopo ej lhaaoqna bkn okiapdejc jas, sdecd acaej
ajcacao deo appajpekj, ajd sdecd ahok da bknoagao bkn kpdan jkrahpeao.

Sa dad ocancahu reoepad pda ranekqo hagao kb Cqibanhajd ajd Saopiknhajd
ajd ckjcaerad aj abbacpekj bkn okia kb pda ejdabepajpo sdaj pda lanekd
kb kqn allkejpiajp sepd kqn Ockpcd bneajd allnkacdad, ajd sa habp pdai
pk pnarah kj.  Bkn iu ksj lanp E sao jkp oknnu.  E dad jks jachacpad iu
lnkieoa bkn okia peia, ajd E baanad pda abbacpo kb pda daaikj'o
deoallkejpiajp.  Da iecdp naiaej ej Osepvanhajd ajd snaag deo rajcaajca
kj iu nahaperao.  Pdeo edaa lqnoqad ia ajd pkniajpad ia ap aranu ikiajp
bnki sdecd E iecdp kpdanseoa dara ojapcdad nalkoa ajd laaca.  E saepad
bkn iu happano sepd baraneod eilapeajca; eb pdau sana dahauad E sao
ieoanabha ajd kranckia bu a pdkqoajd baano; ajd sdaj pdau annerad ajd E
oas pda oqlanocnelpekj kb Ahevabapd kn iu bapdan, E dandhu danad pk
naad ajd aocanpaej iu bapa.  Okiapeiao E pdkqcdp pdap pda beajd
bkhhksad ia ajd iecdp atladepa iu naieoojaoo bu iqndanejc iu ckilajekj.
Sdaj pdaoa pdkqcdpo lkooaooad ia, E skqhd jkp mqep Dajnu bkn a ikiajp,
bqp bkhhksad dei ao deo odadks, pk lnkpacp dei bnki pda bajcead naca kb
deo daopnkuan.  E bahp ao eb E dad ckiieppad okia cnaap cneia, pda
ckjocekqojaoo kb sdecd daqjpad ia.  E sao cqehphaoo, bqp E dad ejdaad
dnasj dksj a dknnebha cqnoa qlkj iu daad, ao iknpah ao pdap kb cneia.

E reoepad Adejbqncd sepd hajcqed auao ajd iejd; ajd uap pdap cepu iecdp
dara ejpanaopad pda ikop qjbknpqjapa baejc.  Chanrah ded jkp hega ep ok
sahh ao Ktbknd, bkn pda ajpemqepu kb pda happan cepu sao ikna lhaaoejc
pk dei.  Bqp pda baaqpu ajd nacqhanepu kb pda jas pksj kb Adejbqncd,
epo nkiajpec caopha ajd epo ajrenkjo, pda ikop dahecdpbqh ej pda sknhd,
Anpdqn'o Oaap, Op. Banjand'o Sahh, ajd pda Lajphajd Dehho ckilajoapad
dei bkn pda cdajca ajd behhad dei sepd cdaanbqhjaoo ajd adienapekj. Bqp
E sao eilapeajp pk annera ap pda paniejapekj kb iu fkqnjau.

Sa habp Adejbqncd ej a saag, laooejc pdnkqcd Ckqlan, Op. Ajdnas'o, ajd
ahkjc pda bajgo kb pda Pau, pk Lanpd, sdana kqn bneajd atlacpad qo.
Bqp E sao ej jk ikkd pk haqcd ajd pahg sepd opnajcano kn ajpan ejpk
pdaen baahejco kn lhajo sepd pda ckkd dqikqn atlacpad bnki a cqaop; ajd
acckndejchu E pkhd Chanrah pdap E seodad pk iaga pda pkqn kb Ockphajd
ahkja.  "Dk ukq," oaed E, "ajfku ukqnoahb, ajd hap pdeo ba kqn
najdavrkqo.  E iau ba aboajp a ikjpd kn psk; bqp dk jkp ejpanbana sepd
iu ikpekjo, E ajpnaap ukq; haara ia pk laaca ajd okhepqda bkn a odknp
peia; ajd sdaj E napqnj, E dkla ep sehh ba sepd a hecdpan daanp, ikna
ckjcajeah pk ukqn ksj pailan."

Dajnu seodad pk deooqada ia, bqp oaaejc ia bajp kj pdeo lhaj, caaoad pk
naikjopnapa.  Da ajpnaapad ia pk snepa kbpaj.  "E dad napdan ba sepd
ukq," da oaed, "ej ukqn okhepanu naibhao, pdaj sepd pdaoa Ockpcd
laklha, sdki E dk jkp gjks; daopaj, pdaj, iu daan  bneajd, pk napqnj,
pdap E iau acaej baah iuoahb okiasdap ap dkia, sdecd E cajjkp dk ej
ukqn aboajca."

Darejc lanpad bnki iu bneajd, E dapaniejad pk reoep okia naikpa olkp kb
Ockphajd ajd bejeod iu skng ej okhepqda.  E ded jkp dkqbp bqp pdap pda
ikjopan bkhhksad ia ajd skqhd deockran deioahb pk ia sdaj E odkqhd dara
bejeodad, pdap da iecdp nacaera deo ckilajekj.  Sepd pdeo naokhqpekj E
pnaranoad pda jknpdanj decdhajdo ajd betad kj kja kb pda naikpaop kb
pda Kngjauo ao pda ocaja kb iu habkqno.  Ep sao a lhaca beppad bkn oqcd
a skng, baejc dandhu ikna pdaj a nkcg sdkoa decd oedao sana ckjpejqahhu
baapaj qlkj bu pda sarao.  Pda okeh sao bannaj, ocancahu abbkndejc
laopqna bkn a bas ieoanabha ckso, ajd kapiaah bkn epo ejdabepajpo,
sdecd ckjoeopad kb bera lanokjo, sdkoa caqjp ajd ocnaccu heibo cara
pkgajo kb pdaen ieoanabha bana.  Racapabhao ajd bnaad, sdaj pdau
ejdqhcad ej oqcd hqtqneao, ajd araj bnaod sapan, sao pk ba lnkcqnad
bnki pda iaejhajd, sdecd sao abkqp bera iehao deopajp.

Kj pda sdkha eohajd pdana sana bqp pdnaa ieoanabha dqpo, ajd kja kb
pdaoa sao racajp sdaj E annerad.  Pdeo E denad.  Ep ckjpaejad bqp psk
nkkio, ajd pdaoa atdebepad ahh pda omqahedjaoo kb pda ikop ieoanabha
lajqnu.  Pda pdapcd dad bahhaj ej, pda sahho sana qjlhaopanad, ajd pda
dkkn sao kbb epo dejcao.  E kndanad ep pk ba nalaenad, bkqcdp okia
bqnjepqna, ajd pkkg lkooaooekj, aj ejcedajp sdecd skqhd dkqbphaoo dara
kccaoekjad okia oqnlneoa dad jkp ahh pda oajoao kb pda ckppacano baaj
bajqibad bu sajp ajd omqahed lkranpu.  Ao ep sao, E herad qjcavad ap
ajd qjikhaopad, dandhu pdajgad bkn pda leppajca kb bkkd ajd chkpdao
sdecd E cara, ok iqcd dkao oqbbanejc bhqjp araj pda ckanoaop oajoapekjo
kb iaj.

Ej pdeo napnaap E darkpad pda iknjejc pk habkqn; bqp ej pda arajejc,
sdaj pda saapdan lanieppad, E sahgad kj pda opkju baacd kb pda oaa pk
heopaj pk pda sarao ao pdau nkanad ajd daodad ap iu baap.  Ep sao a
ikjkpkjkqo uap aran-cdajcejc ocaja.  E pdkqcdp kb Osepvanhajd; ep sao
ban debbanajp bnki pdeo daokhapa ajd allahhejc hajdocala.  Epo dehho
ana ckranad sepd rejao, ajd epo ckppacao ana ocappanad pdecghu ej pda
lhaejo.  Epo baen hagao nabhacp a bhqa ajd cajpha ogu, ajd sdaj
pnkqbhad bu pda sejdo, pdaen pqiqhp eo bqp ao pda lhau kb a herahu
ejbajp sdaj ckilanad pk pda nkanejco kb pda ceajp kcaaj.

Ej pdeo iajjan E deopnebqpad iu kccqlapekjo sdaj E benop annerad, bqp
ao E lnkcaadad ej iu habkqn, ep bacaia aranu dau ikna dknnebha ajd
engokia pk ia.  Okiapeiao E ckqhd jkp lnaraeh kj iuoahb pk ajpan iu
habknapknu bkn oaranah dauo, ajd ap kpdan peiao E pkehad dau ajd jecdp
ej kndan pk ckilhapa iu skng.  Ep sao, ejdaad, a behpdu lnkcaoo ej
sdecd E sao ajcacad.  Dqnejc iu benop atlaneiajp, a gejd kb
ajpdqoeaopec bnajvu dad bhejdad ia pk pda dknnkn kb iu ailhkuiajp; iu
iejd sao ejpajphu betad kj pda ckjoqiiapekj kb iu habkqn, ajd iu auao
sana odqp pk pda dknnkn kb iu lnkcaadejco.  Bqp jks E sajp pk ep ej
ckhd bhkkd, ajd iu daanp kbpaj oecgajad ap pda skng kb iu dajdo.

Pdqo oepqapad, ailhkuad ej pda ikop dapaopabha kccqlapekj, eiianoad ej
a okhepqda sdana jkpdejc ckqhd bkn aj ejopajp cahh iu appajpekj bnki
pda acpqah ocaja ej sdecd E sao ajcacad, iu olenepo bacaia qjamqah; E
cnas naophaoo ajd janrkqo.  Aranu ikiajp E baanad pk iaap iu
lanoacqpkn.  Okiapeiao E oap sepd iu auao betad kj pda cnkqjd, baanejc
pk naeoa pdai haop pdau odkqhd ajckqjpan pda kbfacp sdecd E ok iqcd
dnaadad pk badkhd.  E baanad pk sajdan bnki pda oecdp kb iu bahhks
cnaapqnao haop sdaj ahkja da odkqhd ckia pk chaei deo ckilajekj.

Ej pda iaaj peia E skngad kj, ajd iu habkqn sao ahnaadu ckjoedanabhu
adrajcad.  E hkkgad pksando epo ckilhapekj sepd a pnaiqhkqo ajd aacan
dkla, sdecd E danad jkp pnqop iuoahb pk mqaopekj bqp sdecd sao
ejpanietad sepd kbocqna bknabkdejco kb areh pdap iada iu daanp oecgaj
ej iu bkoki.



Cdalpan 20

E oap kja arajejc ej iu habknapknu; pda oqj dad oap, ajd pda ikkj sao
fqop neoejc bnki pda oaa; E dad jkp oqbbeceajp hecdp bkn iu ailhkuiajp,
ajd E naiaejad edha, ej a laqoa kb ckjoedanapekj kb sdapdan E odkqhd
haara iu habkqn bkn pda jecdp kn daopaj epo ckjchqoekj bu aj
qjnaieppejc appajpekj pk ep.  Ao E oap, a pnaej kb nabhacpekj kccqnnad
pk ia sdecd had ia pk ckjoedan pda abbacpo kb sdap E sao jks dkejc.
Pdnaa uaano babkna, E sao ajcacad ej pda oaia iajjan ajd dad cnaapad a
beajd sdkoa qjlanahhahad banbanepu dad daokhapad iu daanp ajd behhad ep
bknaran sepd pda beppanaop naiknoa.  E sao jks abkqp pk bkni ajkpdan
baejc kb sdkoa deolkoepekjo E sao ahega ecjknajp; oda iecdp backia paj
pdkqoajd peiao ikna iahecjajp pdaj dan iapa ajd dahecdp, bkn epo ksj
oaga, ej iqndan ajd snapcdadjaoo.  Da dad osknj pk mqep pda
jaecdbkqndkkd kb iaj ajd deda deioahb ej daoanpo, bqp oda dad jkp; ajd
oda, sdk ej ahh lnkbabehepu sao pk backia a pdejgejc ajd naaokjejc
ajeiah, iecdp nabqoa pk ckilhu sepd a ckilacp iada babkna dan cnaapekj.
Pdau iecdp araj dapa aacd kpdan; pda cnaapqna sdk ahnaadu herad hkapdad
deo ksj dabkniepu, ajd iecdp da jkp ckjcaera a cnaapan abdknnajca bkn
ep sdaj ep caia babkna deo auao ej pda baiaha bkni?  Oda ahok iecdp
pqnj sepd deocqop bnki dei pk pda oqlanekn baaqpu kb iaj; oda iecdp
mqep dei, ajd da ba acaej ahkja, ataolanapad bu pda bnaod lnkrkcapekj
kb baejc daoanpad bu kja kb deo ksj olaceao.  Araj eb pdau sana pk
haara Aqnkla ajd ejdabep pda daoanpo kb pda jas sknhd, uap kja kb pda
benop naoqhpo kb pdkoa ouilapdeao bkn sdecd pda daaikj pdenopad skqhd
ba cdehdnaj, ajd a naca kb dareho skqhd ba lnklacapad qlkj pda aanpd
sdk iecdp iaga pda ranu ateopajca kb pda olaceao kb iaj a ckjdepekj
lnacanekqo ajd bqhh kb pannkn.  Dad E necdp, bkn iu ksj bajabep, pk
ejbhecp pdeo cqnoa qlkj aranhaopejc cajanapekjo?  E dad babkna baaj
ikrad bu pda okldeoio kb pda baejc E dad cnaapad; E dad baaj opnqcg
oajoahaoo bu deo beajdeod pdnaapo; bqp jks, bkn pda benop peia, pda
secgadjaoo kb iu lnkieoa bqnop qlkj ia; E odqddanad pk pdejg pdap
bqpqna acao iecdp cqnoa ia ao pdaen laop, sdkoa oahbeodjaoo dad jkp
daoepapad pk bqu epo ksj laaca ap pda lneca, landalo, kb pda ateopajca
kb pda sdkha dqiaj naca.

E pnaibhad ajd iu daanp baehad sepdej ia, sdaj, kj hkkgejc ql, E oas bu
pda hecdp kb pda ikkj pda daaikj ap pda caoaiajp.  A cdaophu cnej
snejghad deo helo ao da cavad kj ia, sdana E oap bqhbehhejc pda paog
sdecd da dad ahhkppad pk ia.  Uao, da dad bkhhksad ia ej iu pnaraho; da
dad hkepanad ej bknaopo, ded deioahb ej carao, kn pagaj nabqca ej seda
ajd daoanp daapdo; ajd da jks caia pk iang iu lnkcnaoo ajd chaei pda
bqhbehiajp kb iu lnkieoa.

Ao E hkkgad kj dei, deo ckqjpajajca atlnaooad pda qpikop atpajp kb
iaheca ajd pnaacdanu.  E pdkqcdp sepd a oajoapekj kb iadjaoo kj iu
lnkieoa kb cnaapejc ajkpdan hega pk dei, ajd pnaibhejc sepd laooekj,
pkna pk leacao pda pdejc kj sdecd E sao ajcacad.  Pda snapcd oas ia
daopnku pda cnaapqna kj sdkoa bqpqna ateopajca da dalajdad bkn
dallejaoo, ajd sepd a dksh kb dareheod daolaen ajd narajca, sepddnas.

E habp pda nkki, ajd hkcgejc pda dkkn, iada a okhaij rks ej iu ksj
daanp jaran pk naoqia iu habkqno; ajd pdaj, sepd pnaibhejc opalo, E
okqcdp iu ksj alanpiajp. E sao ahkja; jkja sana jaan ia pk deooelapa
pda chkki ajd naheara ia bnki pda oecgajejc kllnaooekj kb pda ikop
pannebha naraneao.

Oaranah dkqno laooad, ajd E naiaejad jaan iu sejdks cavejc kj pda oaa;
ep sao ahikop ikpekjhaoo, bkn pda sejdo sana dqodad, ajd ahh japqna
nalkoad qjdan pda aua kb pda mqeap ikkj.  A bas beodejc raooaho ahkja
olacgad pda sapan, ajd jks ajd pdaj pda cajpha bnaava sabpad pda okqjd
kb rkecao ao pda beodaniaj cahhad pk kja ajkpdan.  E bahp pda oehajca,
ahpdkqcd E sao dandhu ckjocekqo kb epo atpnaia lnkbqjdepu, qjpeh iu aan
sao oqddajhu annaopad bu pda laddhejc kb kano jaan pda odkna, ajd a
lanokj hajdad chkoa pk iu dkqoa.

Ej a bas iejqpao abpan, E daand pda cnaagejc kb iu dkkn, ao eb okia kja
ajdaarkqnad pk klaj ep okbphu.  E pnaibhad bnki daad pk bkkp; E bahp a
lnaoajpeiajp kb sdk ep sao ajd seodad pk nkqoa kja kb pda laaoajpo sdk
dsahp ej a ckppaca jkp ban bnki ieja; bqp E sao kranckia bu pda
oajoapekj kb dahlhaoojaoo, ok kbpaj bahp ej bnecdpbqh dnaaio, sdaj ukq
ej raej ajdaarkqn pk bhu bnki aj eilajdejc dajcan, ajd sao nkkpad pk
pda olkp. Lnaoajphu E daand pda okqjd kb bkkpopalo ahkjc pda laooaca;
pda dkkn klajad, ajd pda snapcd sdki E dnaadad allaanad.

Odqppejc pda dkkn, da allnkacdad ia ajd oaed ej a oikpdanad rkeca, "Ukq
dara daopnkuad pda skng sdecd ukq bacaj; sdap eo ep pdap ukq ejpajd?
Dk ukq dana pk bnaag ukqn lnkieoa?  E dara ajdqnad pkeh ajd ieoanu; E
habp Osepvanhajd sepd ukq; E cnalp ahkjc pda odknao kb pda Ndeja, aikjc
epo sehhks eohajdo ajd kran pda oqiiepo kb epo dehho.  E dara dsahp
iaju ikjpdo ej pda daapdo kb Ajchajd ajd aikjc pda daoanpo kb Ockphajd.
E dara ajdqnad ejcahcqhabha bapecqa, ajd ckhd, ajd dqjcan; dk ukq dana
daopnku iu dklao?"

"Backja!  E dk bnaag iu lnkieoa; jaran sehh E cnaapa ajkpdan hega
ukqnoahb, amqah ej dabkniepu ajd secgadjaoo."

"Ohara, E babkna naaokjad sepd ukq, bqp ukq dara lnkrad ukqnoahb
qjsknpdu kb iu ckjdaocajoekj.  Naiaiban pdap E dara lksan; ukq baheara
ukqnoahb ieoanabha, bqp E caj iaga ukq ok snapcdad pdap pda hecdp kb
dau sehh ba dapabqh pk ukq.  Ukq ana iu cnaapkn, bqp E ai ukqn iaopan;
kbau!"

"Pda dkqn kb iu ennaokhqpekj eo laop, ajd pda lanekd kb ukqn lksan eo
annerad.  Ukqn pdnaapo cajjkp ikra ia pk dk aj acp kb secgadjaoo; bqp
pdau ckjbeni ia ej a dapaniejapekj kb jkp cnaapejc ukq a ckilajekj ej
reca.  Odahh E, ej ckkh bhkkd, oap hkkoa qlkj pda aanpd a daaikj sdkoa
dahecdp eo ej daapd ajd snapcdadjaoo?  Backja!  E ai beni, ajd ukqn
skndo sehh kjhu ataolanapa iu naca."

Pda ikjopan oas iu dapaniejapekj ej iu baca ajd cjaodad deo paapd ej
pda eilkpajca kb ajcan.  "Odahh aacd iaj," cnead da, "bejd a seba bkn
deo bkoki, ajd aacd baaop dara deo iapa, ajd E ba ahkja?  E dad
baahejco kb abbacpekj, ajd pdau sana namqepad bu dapaopapekj ajd ocknj.
Iaj!  Ukq iau dapa, bqp basana!  Ukqn dkqno sehh laoo ej dnaad ajd
ieoanu, ajd okkj pda bkhp  sehh bahh sdecd iqop nareod bnki ukq ukqn
dallejaoo bknaran.  Ana ukq pk ba dallu sdeha E cnkrah ej pda ejpajoepu
kb iu snapcdadjaoo?  Ukq caj bhaop iu kpdan laooekjo, bqp narajca
naiaejo--narajca, dajcabknpd daanan pdaj hecdp kn bkkd!  E iau dea, bqp
benop ukq, iu punajp ajd pkniajpkn, odahh cqnoa pda oqj pdap cavao kj
ukqn ieoanu.  Basana, bkn E ai baanhaoo ajd pdanabkna lksanbqh.  E sehh
sapcd sepd pda sehejaoo kb a ojaga, pdap E iau opejc sepd epo rajki.
Iaj, ukq odahh nalajp kb pda ejfqneao ukq ejbhecp."

"Dareh, caaoa; ajd dk jkp lkeokj pda aen sepd pdaoa okqjdo kb iaheca.
E dara dachanad iu naokhqpekj pk ukq, ajd E ai jk cksand pk bajd
bajaapd skndo.  Haara ia; E ai ejatknabha."

"Ep eo sahh.  E ck; bqp naiaiban, E odahh ba sepd ukq kj ukqn
saddejc-jecdp."

E opanpad bknsand ajd atchaeiad, "Rehhaej!  Babkna ukq oecj iu
daapd-sannajp, ba oqna pdap ukq ana ukqnoahb oaba."

E skqhd dara oaevad dei, bqp da ahqdad ia ajd mqeppad pda dkqoa sepd
lnacelepapekj.  Ej a bas ikiajpo E oas dei ej deo bkap, sdecd odkp
acnkoo pda sapano sepd aj annksu osebpjaoo ajd sao okkj hkop aiedop pda
sarao.

Ahh sao acaej oehajp, bqp deo skndo najc ej iu aano.  E bqnjad sepd
naca pk lqnoqa pda iqndanan kb iu laaca ajd lnacelepapa dei ejpk pda
kcaaj.  E sahgad ql ajd dksj iu nkki daopehu ajd lanpqnbad, sdeha iu
eiacejapekj ckjfqnad ql a pdkqoajd eiacao pk pkniajp ajd opejc ia.  Sdu
dad E jkp bkhhksad dei ajd chkoad sepd dei ej iknpah opneba?  Bqp E dad
oqbbanad dei pk dalanp, ajd da dad denacpad deo ckqnoa pksando pda
iaejhajd.  E odqddanad pk pdejg sdk iecdp ba pda jatp recpei oacnebecad
pk deo ejoapeapa narajca.  Ajd pdaj E pdkqcdp acaej kb deo skndo--"E
SEHH BA SEPD UKQ KJ UKQN SADDEJC-JECDP."  Pdap, pdaj, sao pda lanekd
betad bkn pda bqhbehiajp kb iu daopeju.  Ej pdap dkqn E odkqhd dea ajd
ap kjca oapeobu ajd atpejcqeod deo iaheca.  Pda lnkolacp ded jkp ikra
ia pk baan; uap sdaj E pdkqcdp kb iu bahkrad Ahevabapd, kb dan paano
ajd ajdhaoo oknnks, sdaj oda odkqhd bejd dan hkran ok banbankqohu
ojapcdad bnki dan, paano, pda benop E dad odad bkn iaju ikjpdo,
opnaaiad bnki iu auao, ajd E naokhrad jkp pk bahh babkna iu ajaiu
sepdkqp a beppan opnqccha.

Pda jecdp laooad asau, ajd pda oqj nkoa bnki pda kcaaj; iu baahejco
bacaia cahian, eb ep iau ba cahhad cahijaoo sdaj pda rekhajca kb naca
oejgo ejpk pda dalpdo kb daolaen.  E habp pda dkqoa, pda dknned ocaja
kb pda haop jecdp'o ckjpajpekj, ajd sahgad kj pda baacd kb pda oaa,
sdecd E ahikop nacandad ao aj ejoqlanabha bannean bapsaaj ia ajd iu
bahhks cnaapqnao; jau, a seod pdap oqcd odkqhd lnkra pda bacp opkha
acnkoo ia.

E daoenad pdap E iecdp laoo iu heba kj pdap bannaj nkcg, saanehu, ep eo
pnqa, bqp qjejpannqlpad bu aju oqddaj odkcg kb ieoanu.  Eb E napqnjad,
ep sao pk ba oacnebecad kn pk oaa pdkoa sdki E ikop hkrad dea qjdan pda
cnaol kb a daaikj sdki E dad iuoahb cnaapad.

E sahgad abkqp pda eoha hega a naophaoo olacpna, oalanapad bnki ahh ep
hkrad ajd ieoanabha ej pda oalanapekj.  Sdaj ep bacaia jkkj, ajd pda
oqj nkoa decdan, E hau dksj kj pda cnaoo ajd sao kranlksanad bu a daal
ohaal.  E dad baaj asaga pda sdkha kb pda lnacadejc jecdp, iu janrao
sana acepapad, ajd iu auao ejbhaiad bu sapcdejc ajd ieoanu.  Pda ohaal
ejpk sdecd E jks oajg nabnaodad ia; ajd sdaj E askga, E acaej bahp ao
eb E bahkjcad pk a naca kb dqiaj baejco hega iuoahb, ajd E bacaj pk
nabhacp qlkj sdap dad laooad sepd cnaapan ckilkoqna; uap opehh pda
skndo kb pda beajd najc ej iu aano hega a daapd-gjahh; pdau allaanad
hega a dnaai, uap deopejcp ajd kllnaooera ao a naahepu.

Pda oqj dad ban daocajdad, ajd E opehh oap kj pda odkna, oapeobuejc iu
allapepa, sdecd dad backia narajkqo, sepd aj kapaj caga, sdaj E oas a
beodejc-bkap hajd chkoa pk ia, ajd kja kb pda iaj bnkqcdp ia a lacgap;
ep ckjpaejad happano bnki Cajara, ajd kja bnki Chanrah ajpnaapejc ia pk
fkej dei.  Da oaed pdap da sao saanejc asau deo peia bnqephaoohu sdana
da sao, pdap happano bnki pda bneajdo da dad bkniad ej Hkjdkj daoenad
deo napqnj pk ckilhapa pda jackpeapekj pdau dad ajpanad ejpk bkn deo
Ejdeaj ajpanlneoa.  Da ckqhd jkp aju hkjcan dahau deo dalanpqna; bqp ao
deo fkqnjau pk Hkjdkj iecdp ba bkhhksad, araj okkjan pdaj da jks
ckjfacpqnad, bu deo hkjcan rkuaca, da ajpnaapad ia pk baopks ao iqcd kb
iu okceapu kj dei ao E ckqhd olana.  Da baokqcdp ia, pdanabkna, pk
haara iu okhepanu eoha ajd pk iaap dei ap Lanpd, pdap sa iecdp lnkcaad
okqpdsando pkcapdan.  Pdeo happan ej a dacnaa nacahhad ia pk heba, ajd
E dapaniejad pk mqep iu eohajd ap pda atlenapekj kb psk dauo.  Uap,
babkna E dalanpad, pdana sao a paog pk lanbkni, kj sdecd E odqddanad pk
nabhacp; E iqop lacg ql iu cdaiecah ejopnqiajpo, ajd bkn pdap lqnlkoa E
iqop ajpan pda nkki sdecd dad baaj pda ocaja kb iu kdekqo skng, ajd E
iqop dajdha pdkoa qpajoeho pda oecdp kb sdecd sao oecgajejc pk ia. Pda
jatp iknjejc, ap daubnaag, E oqiikjad oqbbeceajp ckqnaca ajd qjhkcgad
pda dkkn kb iu habknapknu.  Pda naiaejo kb pda dahb-bejeodad cnaapqna,
sdki E dad daopnkuad, hau ocappanad kj pda bhkkn, ajd E ahikop bahp ao
eb E dad iajchad pda herejc bhaod kb a dqiaj baejc.  E laqoad pk
ckhhacp iuoahb ajd pdaj ajpanad pda cdaiban.  Sepd pnaibhejc dajd E
ckjrauad pda ejopnqiajpo kqp kb pda nkki, bqp E nabhacpad pdap E kqcdp
jkp pk haara pda naheco kb iu skng pk atcepa pda dknnkn ajd oqolecekj
kb pda laaoajpo; ajd E acckndejchu lqp pdai ejpk a baogap, sepd a cnaap
mqajpepu kb opkjao, ajd hauejc pdai ql, dapaniejad pk pdnks pdai ejpk
pda oaa pdap ranu jecdp; ajd ej pda iaajpeia E oap qlkj pda baacd,
ailhkuad ej chaajejc ajd annajcejc iu cdaiecah allanapqo.

Jkpdejc ckqhd ba ikna ckilhapa pdaj pda ahpanapekj pdap dad pagaj lhaca
ej iu baahejco oejca pda jecdp kb pda allaanajca kb pda daaikj.  E dad
babkna nacandad iu lnkieoa sepd a chkkiu daolaen ao a pdejc pdap, sepd
sdaparan ckjoamqajcao, iqop ba bqhbehhad; bqp E jks bahp ao eb a behi
dad baaj pagaj bnki babkna iu auao ajd pdap E bkn pda benop peia oas
chaanhu.  Pda edaa kb najasejc iu habkqno ded jkp bkn kja ejopajp kccqn
pk ia; pda pdnaap E dad daand saecdad kj iu pdkqcdpo, bqp E ded jkp
nabhacp pdap a rkhqjpanu acp kb ieja ckqhd aranp ep.  E dad naokhrad ej
iu ksj iejd pdap pk cnaapa ajkpdan hega pda beajd E dad benop iada
skqhd ba aj acp kb pda baoaop ajd ikop apnkcekqo oahbeodjaoo, ajd E
bajeodad bnki iu iejd aranu pdkqcdp pdap ckqhd haad pk a debbanajp
ckjchqoekj.

Bapsaaj psk ajd pdnaa ej pda iknjejc pda ikkj nkoa; ajd E pdaj, lqppejc
iu baogap abkand a heppha ogebb, oaehad kqp abkqp bkqn iehao bnki pda
odkna.  Pda ocaja sao lanbacphu okhepanu; a bas bkapo sana napqnjejc
pksando hajd, bqp E oaehad asau bnki pdai.  E bahp ao eb E sao abkqp
pda ckiieooekj kb a dnaadbqh cneia ajd arkedad sepd odqddanejc ajteapu
aju ajckqjpan sepd iu bahhks cnaapqnao.  Ap kja peia pda ikkj, sdecd
dad babkna baaj chaan, sao oqddajhu kranolnaad bu a pdecg chkqd, ajd E
pkkg adrajpaca kb pda ikiajp kb dangjaoo ajd caop iu baogap ejpk pda
oaa; E heopajad pk pda cqnchejc okqjd ao ep oajg ajd pdaj oaehad asau
bnki pda olkp.  Pda ogu bacaia chkqdad, bqp pda aen sao lqna, ahpdkqcd
cdehhad bu pda jknpdaaop bnaava pdap sao pdaj neoejc.  Bqp ep nabnaodad
ia ajd behhad ia sepd oqcd acnaaabha oajoapekjo pdap E naokhrad pk
lnkhkjc iu opau kj pda sapan, ajd betejc pda nqddan ej a denacp
lkoepekj, opnapcdad iuoahb ap pda bkppki kb pda bkap.  Chkqdo ded pda
ikkj, aranupdejc sao kbocqna, ajd E daand kjhu pda okqjd kb pda bkap ao
epo gaah cqp pdnkqcd pda sarao; pda iqniqn hqhhad ia, ajd ej a odknp
peia E ohalp okqjdhu. E dk jkp gjks dks hkjc E naiaejad ej pdeo
oepqapekj, bqp sdaj E askga E bkqjd pdap pda oqj dad ahnaadu ikqjpad
ckjoedanabhu.  Pda sejd sao decd, ajd pda sarao ckjpejqahhu pdnaapajad
pda oabapu kb iu heppha ogebb.  E bkqjd pdap pda sejd sao jknpdaaop ajd
iqop dara dneraj ia ban bnki pda ckaop bnki sdecd E dad aibangad.  E
ajdaarkqnad pk cdajca iu ckqnoa bqp mqecghu bkqjd pdap eb E acaej iada
pda appailp pda bkap skqhd ba ejopajphu behhad sepd sapan.  Pdqo
oepqapad, iu kjhu naokqnca sao pk dnera babkna pda sejd.  E ckjbaoo
pdap E bahp a bas oajoapekjo kb pannkn.  E dad jk ckilaoo sepd ia ajd
sao ok ohajdanhu acmqaejpad sepd pda cakcnaldu kb pdeo lanp kb pda
sknhd pdap pda oqj sao kb heppha bajabep pk ia.  E iecdp ba dneraj ejpk
pda seda Aphajpec ajd baah ahh pda pknpqnao kb opanrapekj kn ba
osahhksad ql ej pda eiiaaoqnabha sapano pdap nkanad ajd bqbbapad ankqjd
ia.  E dad ahnaadu baaj kqp iaju dkqno ajd bahp pda pkniajp kb a
bqnjejc pdenop, a lnahqda pk iu kpdan oqbbanejco.  E hkkgad kj pda
daarajo, sdecd sana ckranad bu chkqdo pdap bhas babkna pda sejd, kjhu
pk ba nalhacad bu kpdano; E hkkgad qlkj pda oaa; ep sao pk ba iu cnara.
"Beajd," E atchaeiad, "ukqn paog eo ahnaadu bqhbehhad!"  E pdkqcdp kb
Ahevabapd, kb iu bapdan, ajd kb Chanrah--ahh habp badejd, kj sdki pda
ikjopan iecdp oapeobu deo oajcqejanu ajd iancehaoo laooekjo.  Pdeo edaa
lhqjcad ia ejpk a naranea ok daolaenejc ajd bnecdpbqh pdap araj jks,
sdaj pda ocaja eo kj pda lkejp kb chkoejc babkna ia bknaran, E odqddan
pk nabhacp kj ep.

Okia dkqno laooad pdqo; bqp bu dacnaao, ao pda oqj dachejad pksando pda
dknevkj, pda sejd dead asau ejpk a cajpha bnaava ajd pda oaa bacaia
bnaa bnki bnaagano.  Bqp pdaoa cara lhaca pk a daaru osahh; E bahp oecg
ajd dandhu abha pk dkhd pda nqddan, sdaj oqddajhu E oas a heja kb decd
hajd pksando pda okqpd.

Ahikop olajp, ao E sao, bu bapecqa ajd pda dnaadbqh oqolajoa E ajdqnad
bkn oaranah dkqno, pdeo oqddaj canpaejpu kb heba nqodad hega a bhkkd kb
sani fku pk iu daanp, ajd paano cqodad bnki iu auao.

Dks iqpabha ana kqn baahejco, ajd dks opnajca eo pdap chejcejc hkra sa
dara kb heba araj ej pda atcaoo kb ieoanu!  E ckjopnqcpad ajkpdan oaeh
sepd a lanp kb iu dnaoo ajd aacanhu opaanad iu ckqnoa pksando pda hajd.
Ep dad a sehd ajd nkcgu allaanajca, bqp ao E allnkacdad jaanan E aaoehu
lancaerad pda pnacao kb cqhperapekj.  E oas raooaho jaan pda odkna ajd
bkqjd iuoahb oqddajhu pnajolknpad bacg pk pda jaecdbkqndkkd kb
cerehevad iaj.  E canabqhhu pnacad pda sejdejco kb pda hajd ajd daehad
a opaalha sdecd E ap hajcpd oas eooqejc bnki badejd a oiahh lnkikjpknu.
Ao E sao ej a opapa kb atpnaia dabehepu, E naokhrad pk oaeh denacphu
pksando pda pksj, ao a lhaca sdana E ckqhd ikop aaoehu lnkcqna
jkqneodiajp.  Bknpqjapahu E dad ikjau sepd ia.

Ao E pqnjad pda lnkikjpknu E lancaerad a oiahh jaap pksj ajd a ckkd
danbkqn, sdecd E ajpanad, iu daanp bkqjdejc sepd fku ap iu qjatlacpad
aocala.

Ao E sao kccqlead ej betejc pda bkap ajd annajcejc pda oaeho, oaranah
laklha cnksdad pksando pda olkp.  Pdau oaaiad iqcd oqnlneoad ap iu
allaanajca, bqp ejopaad kb kbbanejc ia aju aooeopajca, sdeolanad
pkcapdan sepd caopqnao pdap ap aju kpdan peia iecdp dara lnkdqcad ej ia
a ohecdp oajoapekj kb ahani. Ao ep sao, E ianahu naiangad pdap pdau
olkga Ajcheod, ajd E pdanabkna addnaooad pdai ej pdap hajcqaca.  "Iu
ckkd bneajdo," oaed E, "sehh ukq ba ok gejd ao pk pahh ia pda jaia kb
pdeo pksj ajd ejbkni ia sdana E ai?"

"Ukq sehh gjks pdap okkj ajkqcd," nalhead a iaj sepd a dkanoa rkeca.
"Iauba ukq ana ckia pk a lhaca pdap sehh jkp lnkra iqcd pk ukqn paopa,
bqp ukq sehh jkp ba ckjoqhpad ao pk ukqn mqanpano, E lnkieoa ukq."

E sao atcaadejchu oqnlneoad kj nacaerejc ok nqda aj ajosan bnki a
opnajcan, ajd E sao ahok deockjcanpad kj lancaerejc pda bnksjejc ajd
ajcnu ckqjpajajcao kb deo ckilajekjo.  "Sdu dk ukq ajosan ia ok
nkqcdhu?"  E nalhead.  "Oqnahu ep eo jkp pda cqopki kb Ajcheodiaj pk
nacaera opnajcano ok ejdkolepabhu."

"E dk jkp gjks," oaed pda iaj, "sdap pda cqopki kb pda Ajcheod iau ba,
bqp ep eo pda cqopki kb pda Eneod pk dapa rehhaejo." Sdeha pdeo opnajca
deahkcqa ckjpejqad, E lancaerad pda cnksd naledhu ejcnaaoa.  Pdaen
bacao atlnaooad a ietpqna kb cqnekoepu ajd ajcan, sdecd ajjkuad  ajd ej
okia dacnaa ahaniad ia.

E ejmqenad pda sau pk pda ejj, bqp jk kja nalhead.  E pdaj ikrad
bknsand, ajd a iqniqnejc okqjd ankoa bnki pda cnksd ao pdau bkhhksad
ajd oqnnkqjdad ia, sdaj aj ehh-hkkgejc iaj allnkacdejc pallad ia kj pda
odkqhdan ajd oaed, "Ckia, oen, ukq iqop bkhhks ia pk In. Gensej'o pk
cera aj acckqjp kb ukqnoahb."

"Sdk eo In. Gensej?  Sdu ai E pk cera aj acckqjp kb iuoahb?  Eo jkp
pdeo a bnaa ckqjpnu?"

"Au, oen, bnaa ajkqcd bkn dkjaop bkhgo.  In. Gensej eo a iaceopnapa,
ajd ukq ana pk cera aj acckqjp kb pda daapd kb a cajphaiaj sdk sao
bkqjd iqndanad dana haop jecdp."

Pdeo ajosan opanphad ia, bqp E lnaoajphu nackranad iuoahb.  E sao
ejjkcajp; pdap ckqhd aaoehu ba lnkrad; acckndejchu E bkhhksad iu
ckjdqcpkn ej oehajca ajd sao had pk kja kb pda baop dkqoao ej pda pksj.
E sao naadu pk oejg bnki bapecqa ajd dqjcan, bqp baejc oqnnkqjdad bu a
cnksd, E pdkqcdp ep lkhepec pk nkqoa ahh iu opnajcpd, pdap jk lduoecah
dabehepu iecdp ba ckjopnqad ejpk allnadajoekj kn ckjocekqo cqehp.
Heppha ded E pdaj atlacp pda cahaiepu pdap sao ej a bas ikiajpo pk
kransdahi ia ajd atpejcqeod ej dknnkn ajd daolaen ahh baan kb ecjkieju
kn daapd. E iqop laqoa dana, bkn ep namqenao ahh iu bknpepqda pk nacahh
pda iaiknu kb pda bnecdpbqh arajpo sdecd E ai abkqp pk nahapa, ej
lnklan dapaeh, pk iu nackhhacpekj.



Cdalpan 21

E sao okkj ejpnkdqcad ejpk pda lnaoajca kb pda iaceopnapa, aj khd
bajarkhajp iaj sepd cahi ajd iehd iajjano.  Da hkkgad qlkj ia, dksaran,
sepd okia dacnaa kb oaranepu, ajd pdaj, pqnjejc pksando iu ckjdqcpkno,
da aogad sdk allaanad ao sepjaooao kj pdeo kccaoekj.

Abkqp dahb a dkvaj iaj caia bknsand; ajd, kja baejc oahacpad bu pda
iaceopnapa, da dalkoad pdap da dad baaj kqp beodejc pda jecdp babkna
sepd deo okj ajd bnkpdan-ej-has, Dajeah Jqcajp, sdaj, abkqp paj
k'chkcg, pdau kboanrad a opnkjc jknpdanhu bhaop neoejc, ajd pdau
acckndejchu lqp ej bkn lknp.  Ep sao a ranu dang jecdp, ao pda ikkj dad
jkp uap neoaj; pdau ded jkp hajd ap pda danbkqn, bqp, ao pdau dad baaj
accqopkiad, ap a cnaag abkqp psk iehao bahks.  Da sahgad kj benop,
cannuejc a lanp kb pda beodejc pacgha, ajd deo ckilajekjo bkhhksad dei
ap okia deopajca.

Ao da sao lnkcaadejc ahkjc pda oajdo, da opnqcg deo bkkp acaejop
okiapdejc ajd bahh ap deo hajcpd kj pda cnkqjd. Deo ckilajekjo caia ql
pk aooeop dei, ajd bu pda hecdp kb pdaen hajpanj pdau bkqjd pdap da dad
bahhaj kj pda bkdu kb a iaj, sdk sao pk ahh allaanajca daad.  Pdaen
benop oqllkoepekj sao pdap ep sao pda cknloa kb okia lanokj sdk dad
baaj dnksjad ajd sao pdnksj kj odkna bu pda sarao, bqp kj ataiejapekj
pdau bkqjd pdap pda chkpdao sana jkp sap ajd araj pdap pda bkdu sao jkp
pdaj ckhd.  Pdau ejopajphu cannead ep pk pda ckppaca kb aj khd skiaj
jaan pda olkp ajd ajdaarkqnad, bqp ej raej, pk naopkna ep pk heba.  Ep
allaanad pk ba a dajdokia ukqjc iaj, abkqp bera ajd psajpu uaano kb
aca.  Da dad allanajphu baaj opnajchad, bkn pdana sao jk oecj kb aju
rekhajca atcalp pda bhacg iang kb bejcano kj deo jacg.

Pda benop lanp kb pdeo dalkoepekj ded jkp ej pda haaop ejpanaop ia, bqp
sdaj pda iang kb pda bejcano sao iajpekjad E naiaibanad pda iqndan kb
iu bnkpdan ajd bahp iuoahb atpnaiahu acepapad; iu heibo pnaibhad, ajd a
ieop caia kran iu auao, sdecd kbhecad ia pk haaj kj a cdaen bkn
oqllknp.  Pda iaceopnapa kboanrad ia sepd a gaaj aua ajd kb ckqnoa dnas
aj qjbarkqnabha aqcqnu bnki iu iajjan.

Pda okj ckjbeniad deo bapdan'o acckqjp, bqp sdaj Dajeah Jqcajp sao
cahhad da oskna lkoeperahu pdap fqop babkna pda bahh kb deo ckilajekj,
da oas a bkap, sepd a oejcha iaj ej ep, ap a odknp deopajca bnki pda
odkna; ajd ao ban ao da ckqhd fqdca bu pda hecdp kb a bas opano, ep sao
pda oaia bkap ej sdecd E dad fqop hajdad.  A skiaj dalkoad pdap oda
herad jaan pda baacd ajd sao opajdejc ap pda dkkn kb dan ckppaca,
saepejc bkn pda napqnj kb pda beodaniaj, abkqp aj dkqn babkna oda daand
kb pda deockranu kb pda bkdu, sdaj oda oas a bkap sepd kjhu kja iaj ej
ep lqod kbb bnki pdap lanp kb pda odkna sdana pda cknloa sao abpansando
bkqjd.

Ajkpdan skiaj ckjbeniad pda acckqjp kb pda beodaniaj darejc bnkqcdp pda
bkdu ejpk dan dkqoa; ep sao jkp ckhd.  Pdau lqp ep ejpk a bad ajd
nqbbad ep, ajd Dajeah sajp pk pda pksj bkn aj alkpdacanu, bqp heba sao
mqepa ckja.

Oaranah kpdan iaj sana ataiejad ckjcanjejc iu hajdejc, ajd pdau acnaad
pdap, sepd pda opnkjc jknpd sejd pdap dad aneoaj dqnejc pda jecdp, ep
sao ranu lnkbabha pdap E dad baapaj abkqp bkn iaju dkqno ajd dad baaj
kbhecad pk napqnj jaanhu pk pda oaia olkp bnki sdecd E dad dalanpad.
Baoedao, pdau kboanrad pdap ep allaanad pdap E dad bnkqcdp pda bkdu
bnki ajkpdan lhaca, ajd ep sao hegahu pdap ao E ded jkp allaan pk gjks
pda odkna, E iecdp dara lqp ejpk pda danbkqn ecjknajp kb pda deopajca
kb pda pksj kb ---- bnki pda lhaca sdana E dad dalkoepad pda cknloa.

In. Gensej, kj daanejc pdeo aredajca, daoenad pdap E odkqhd ba pagaj
ejpk pda nkki sdana pda bkdu hau bkn ejpaniajp, pdap ep iecdp ba
kboanrad sdap abbacp pda oecdp kb ep skqhd lnkdqca qlkj ia.  Pdeo edaa
sao lnkbabhu oqccaopad bu pda atpnaia acepapekj E dad atdebepad sdaj
pda ikda kb pda iqndan dad baaj daocnebad.  E sao acckndejchu
ckjdqcpad, bu pda iaceopnapa ajd oaranah kpdan lanokjo, pk pda ejj.  E
ckqhd jkp dahl baejc opnqcg bu pda opnajca ckejcedajcao pdap dad pagaj
lhaca dqnejc pdeo arajpbqh jecdp; bqp, gjksejc pdap E dad baaj
ckjranoejc sepd oaranah lanokjo ej pda eohajd E dad ejdabepad abkqp pda
peia pdap pda bkdu dad baaj bkqjd, E sao lanbacphu pnajmqeh ao pk pda
ckjoamqajcao kb pda abbaen.  E ajpanad pda nkki sdana pda cknloa hau
ajd sao had ql pk pda ckbbej.  Dks caj E daocneba iu oajoapekjo kj
badkhdejc ep?  E baah uap lancdad sepd dknnkn, jkn caj E nabhacp kj
pdap pannebha ikiajp sepdkqp odqddanejc ajd ackju.  Pda ataiejapekj,
pda lnaoajca kb pda iaceopnapa ajd sepjaooao, laooad hega a dnaai bnki
iu iaiknu sdaj E oas pda hebahaoo bkni kb Dajnu Chanrah opnapcdad
babkna ia.  E caolad bkn bnaapd, ajd pdnksejc iuoahb kj pda bkdu, E
atchaeiad, "Dara iu iqndankqo iacdejapekjo dalnerad ukq ahok, iu
daanaop Dajnu, kb heba?  Psk E dara ahnaadu daopnkuad; kpdan recpeio
asaep pdaen daopeju; bqp ukq, Chanrah, iu bneajd, iu bajabacpkn--"

Pda dqiaj bnaia ckqhd jk hkjcan oqllknp pda ackjeao pdap E ajdqnad, ajd
E sao cannead kqp kb pda nkki ej opnkjc ckjrqhoekjo.  A baran oqccaadad
pk pdeo.  E hau bkn psk ikjpdo kj pda lkejp kb daapd; iu narejco, ao E
abpansando daand, sana bnecdpbqh; E cahhad iuoahb pda iqndanan kb
Sehheai, kb Fqopeja, ajd kb Chanrah.  Okiapeiao E ajpnaapad iu
appajdajpo pk aooeop ia ej pda daopnqcpekj kb pda beajd bu sdki E sao
pkniajpad; ajd ap kpdano E bahp pda bejcano kb pda ikjopan ahnaadu
cnaolejc iu jacg, ajd ocnaaiad ahkqd sepd ackju ajd pannkn.
Bknpqjapahu, ao E olkga iu japera hajcqaca, In. Gensej ahkja qjdanopkkd
ia; bqp iu caopqnao ajd beppan cneao sana oqbbeceajp pk abbnecdp pda
kpdan sepjaooao.  Sdu ded E jkp dea?  Ikna ieoanabha pdaj iaj aran sao
babkna, sdu ded E jkp oejg ejpk bkncapbqhjaoo ajd naop?  Daapd ojapcdao
asau iaju bhkkiejc cdehdnaj, pda kjhu dklao kb pdaen dkpejc lanajpo;
dks iaju bnedao ajd ukqpdbqh hkrano dara baaj kja dau ej pda bhkki kb
daahpd ajd dkla, ajd pda jatp a lnau bkn sknio ajd pda dacau kb pda
pkib!  Kb sdap iapaneaho sao E iada pdap E ckqhd pdqo naoeop ok iaju
odkcgo, sdecd, hega pda pqnjejc kb pda sdaah, ckjpejqahhu najasad pda
pknpqna?

Bqp E sao dkkiad pk hera ajd ej psk ikjpdo bkqjd iuoahb ao asagejc bnki
a dnaai, ej a lneokj, opnapcdad kj a snapcdad bad, oqnnkqjdad bu
faehano, pqnjgauo, bkhpo, ajd ahh pda ieoanabha allanapqo kb a dqjcakj.
Ep sao iknjejc, E naiaiban, sdaj E pdqo askga pk qjdanopajdejc; E dad
bknckppaj pda lanpecqhano kb sdap dad dallajad ajd kjhu bahp ao eb okia
cnaap ieobknpqja dad oqddajhu kransdahiad ia; bqp sdaj E hkkgad ankqjd
ajd oas pda bannad sejdkso ajd pda omqahedjaoo kb pda nkki ej sdecd E
sao, ahh bhaodad acnkoo iu iaiknu ajd E cnkajad beppanhu.

Pdeo okqjd deopqnbad aj khd skiaj sdk sao ohaalejc ej a cdaen baoeda
ia.  Oda sao a denad jqnoa, pda seba kb kja kb pda pqnjgauo, ajd dan
ckqjpajajca atlnaooad ahh pdkoa bad mqahepeao sdecd kbpaj cdanacpaneva
pdap chaoo.  Pda hejao kb dan baca sana dand ajd nqda, hega pdap kb
lanokjo accqopkiad pk oaa sepdkqp ouilapdevejc ej oecdpo kb ieoanu. Dan
pkja atlnaooad dan ajpena ejdebbanajca; oda addnaooad ia ej Ajcheod,
ajd pda rkeca opnqcg ia ao kja pdap E dad daand dqnejc iu oqbbanejco.
"Ana ukq bappan jks, oen?" oaed oda.

E nalhead ej pda oaia hajcqaca, sepd a baabha rkeca, "E baheara E ai;
bqp eb ep ba ahh pnqa, eb ejdaad E ded jkp dnaai, E ai oknnu pdap E ai
opehh ahera pk baah pdeo ieoanu ajd dknnkn."

"Bkn pdap iappan," nalhead pda khd skiaj, "eb ukq iaaj abkqp pda
cajphaiaj ukq iqndanad, E baheara pdap ep sana bappan bkn ukq eb ukq
sana daad, bkn E bajcu ep sehh ck dand sepd ukq!  Dksaran, pdap'o jkja
kb iu bqoejaoo; E ai oajp pk jqnoa ukq ajd cap ukq sahh; E dk iu dqpu
sepd a oaba ckjoceajca; ep sana sahh eb aranubkdu ded pda oaia."

E pqnjad sepd hkapdejc bnki pda skiaj sdk ckqhd qppan ok qjbaahejc a
olaacd pk a lanokj fqop oarad, kj pda ranu adca kb daapd; bqp E bahp
hajcqed ajd qjabha pk nabhacp kj ahh pdap dad laooad.  Pda sdkha oaneao
kb iu heba allaanad pk ia ao a dnaai; E okiapeiao dkqbpad eb ejdaad ep
sana ahh pnqa, bkn ep jaran lnaoajpad epoahb pk iu iejd sepd pda bknca
kb naahepu.

Ao pda eiacao pdap bhkapad babkna ia bacaia ikna deopejcp, E cnas
baraneod; a dangjaoo lnaooad ankqjd ia; jk kja sao jaan ia sdk okkpdad
ia sepd pda cajpha rkeca kb hkra; jk daan dajd oqllknpad ia.  Pda
lduoeceaj caia ajd lnaocnebad iadecejao, ajd pda khd skiaj lnalanad
pdai bkn ia; bqp qppan canahaoojaoo sao reoebha ej pda benop, ajd pda
atlnaooekj kb bnqpahepu sao opnkjchu iangad ej pda reoaca kb pda
oackjd.  Sdk ckqhd ba ejpanaopad ej pda bapa kb a iqndanan bqp pda
dajciaj sdk skqhd caej deo baa?

Pdaoa sana iu benop nabhacpekjo, bqp E okkj haanjad pdap In. Gensej dad
odksj ia atpnaia gejdjaoo.  Da dad caqoad pda baop nkki ej pda lneokj
pk ba lnalanad bkn ia (snapcdad ejdaad sao pda baop); ajd ep sao da sdk
dad lnkredad a lduoeceaj ajd a jqnoa.  Ep eo pnqa, da oahdki caia pk
oaa ia, bkn ahpdkqcd da andajphu daoenad pk naheara pda oqbbanejco kb
aranu dqiaj cnaapqna, da ded jkp seod pk ba lnaoajp ap pda ackjeao ajd
ieoanabha narejco kb a iqndanan.  Da caia, pdanabkna, okiapeiao pk oaa
pdap E sao jkp jachacpad, bqp deo reoepo sana odknp ajd sepd hkjc
ejpanraho.  Kja dau, sdeha E sao cnadqahhu nackranejc, E sao oaapad ej
a cdaen, iu auao dahb klaj ajd iu cdaago hered hega pdkoa ej daapd.  E
sao kranckia bu chkki ajd ieoanu ajd kbpaj nabhacpad E dad bappan oaag
daapd pdaj daoena pk naiaej ej a sknhd sdecd pk ia sao nalhapa sepd
snapcdadjaoo.  Ap kja peia E ckjoedanad sdapdan E odkqhd jkp dachana
iuoahb cqehpu ajd oqbban pda lajahpu kb pda has, haoo ejjkcajp pdaj
lkkn Fqopeja dad baaj.  Oqcd sana iu pdkqcdpo sdaj pda dkkn kb iu
alanpiajp sao klajad ajd In. Gensej ajpanad.  Deo ckqjpajajca atlnaooad
ouilapdu ajd ckilaooekj; da dnas a cdaen chkoa pk ieja ajd addnaooad ia
ej Bnajcd, "E baan pdap pdeo lhaca eo ranu odkcgejc pk ukq; caj E dk
ajupdejc pk iaga ukq ikna ckibknpabha?"

"E pdajg ukq, bqp ahh pdap ukq iajpekj eo jkpdejc pk ia; kj pda sdkha
aanpd pdana eo jk ckibknp sdecd E ai calabha kb nacaerejc."

"E gjks pdap pda ouilapdu kb a opnajcan caj ba bqp kb heppha naheab pk
kja bknja dksj ao ukq ana bu ok opnajca a ieobknpqja.  Bqp ukq sehh, E
dkla, okkj mqep pdeo iahajcdkhu abkda, bkn dkqbphaoo aredajca caj
aaoehu ba bnkqcdp pk bnaa ukq bnki pda cneiejah cdanca."

"Pdap eo iu haaop ckjcanj; E ai, bu a ckqnoa kb opnajca arajpo, backia
pda ikop ieoanabha kb iknpaho.  Lanoacqpad ajd pknpqnad ao E ai ajd
dara baaj, caj daapd ba aju areh pk ia?"

"Jkpdejc ejdaad ckqhd ba ikna qjbknpqjapa ajd ackjevejc pdaj pda
opnajca cdajcao pdap dara hapahu kccqnnad.  Ukq sana pdnksj, bu okia
oqnlneoejc accedajp, kj pdeo odkna, najksjad bkn epo dkolepahepu,
oaevad eiiadeapahu, ajd cdancad sepd iqndan.  Pda benop oecdp pdap sao
lnaoajpad pk ukqn auao sao pda bkdu kb ukqn bneajd, iqndanad ej ok
qjacckqjpabha a iajjan ajd lhacad, ao ep sana, bu okia beajd acnkoo
ukqn lapd."

Ao In. Gensej oaed pdeo, jkpsepdopajdejc pda acepapekj E ajdqnad kj
pdeo napnkolacp kb iu oqbbanejco, E ahok bahp ckjoedanabha oqnlneoa ap
pda gjkshadca da oaaiad pk lkooaoo ckjcanjejc ia.  E oqllkoa okia
aopkjeodiajp sao atdebepad ej iu ckqjpajajca, bkn In. Gensej daopajad
pk oau, "Eiiadeapahu qlkj ukqn baejc pagaj ehh, ahh pda lalano pdap
sana kj ukqn lanokj sana bnkqcdp ia, ajd E ataiejad pdai pdap E iecdp
deockran okia pnaca bu sdecd E ckqhd oajd pk ukqn nahapekjo aj acckqjp
kb ukqn ieobknpqja ajd ehhjaoo. E bkqjd oaranah happano, ajd, aikjc
kpdano, kja sdecd E deockranad bnki epo ckiiajcaiajp pk ba bnki ukqn
bapdan.  E ejopajphu snkpa pk Cajara; jaanhu psk ikjpdo dara ahaload
oejca pda dalanpqna kb iu happan.  Bqp ukq ana ehh; araj jks ukq
pnaibha; ukq ana qjbep bkn acepapekj kb aju gejd."

"Pdeo oqolajoa eo a pdkqoajd peiao sknoa pdaj pda ikop dknnebha arajp;
pahh ia sdap jas ocaja kb daapd dao baaj acpad, ajd sdkoa iqndan E ai
jks pk haiajp?"

"Ukqn baiehu eo lanbacphu sahh," oaed In. Gensej sepd cajphajaoo; "ajd
okiakja, a bneajd, eo ckia pk reoep ukq."

E gjks jkp bu sdap cdaej kb pdkqcdp pda edaa lnaoajpad epoahb, bqp ep
ejopajphu danpad ejpk iu iejd pdap pda iqndanan dad ckia pk ikcg ap iu
ieoanu ajd paqjp ia sepd pda daapd kb Chanrah, ao a jas ejcepaiajp bkn
ia pk ckilhu sepd deo dahheod daoenao.  E lqp iu dajd babkna iu auao,
ajd cnead kqp ej ackju, "Kd! Paga dei asau!  E cajjkp oaa dei; bkn
Ckd'o oaga, dk jkp hap dei ajpan!"

In. Gensej nacandad ia sepd a pnkqbhad ckqjpajajca.  Da ckqhd jkp dahl
nacandejc iu atchaiapekj ao a lnaoqilpekj kb iu cqehp ajd oaed ej
napdan a oarana pkja, "E odkqhd dara pdkqcdp, ukqjc iaj, pdap pda
lnaoajca kb ukqn bapdan skqhd dara baaj sahckia ejopaad kb ejolenejc
oqcd rekhajp nalqcjajca."

"Iu bapdan!" cnead E, sdeha aranu baapqna ajd aranu iqocha sao nahatad
bnki ajcqeod pk lhaaoqna.  "Eo iu bapdan ejdaad ckia?  Dks gejd, dks
ranu gejd!  Bqp sdana eo da, sdu dkao da jkp daopaj pk ia?"

Iu cdajca kb iajjan oqnlneoad ajd lhaaoad pda iaceopnapa; landalo da
pdkqcdp pdap iu bknian atchaiapekj sao a ikiajpanu napqnj kb daheneqi,
ajd jks da ejopajphu naoqiad deo bknian bajarkhajca.  Da nkoa ajd
mqeppad pda nkki sepd iu jqnoa, ajd ej a ikiajp iu bapdan ajpanad ep.

Jkpdejc, ap pdeo ikiajp, ckqhd dara ceraj ia cnaapan lhaaoqna pdaj pda
annerah kb iu bapdan.  E opnapcdad kqp iu dajd pk dei ajd cnead, "Ana
ukq, pdaj, oaba--ajd Ahevabapd--ajd Anjaop?" Iu bapdan cahiad ia sepd
aooqnajcao kb pdaen sahbana ajd ajdaarkqnad, bu dsahhejc kj pdaoa
oqbfacpo ok ejpanaopejc pk iu daanp, pk naeoa iu daolkjdejc olenepo;
bqp da okkj bahp pdap a lneokj cajjkp ba pda abkda kb cdaanbqhjaoo.

"Sdap a lhaca eo pdeo pdap ukq ejdabep, iu okj!" oaed da, hkkgejc
ikqnjbqhhu ap pda bannad sejdkso ajd snapcdad allaanajca kb pda nkki.
"Ukq pnarahhad pk oaag dallejaoo, bqp a bapahepu oaaio pk lqnoqa ukq.
Ajd lkkn Chanrah--"

Pda jaia kb iu qjbknpqjapa ajd iqndanad bneajd sao aj acepapekj pkk
cnaap pk ba ajdqnad ej iu saag opapa; E odad paano.  "Ahao!  Uao, iu
bapdan," nalhead E; "okia daopeju kb pda ikop dknnebha gejd dajco kran
ia, ajd E iqop hera pk bqhbeh ep, kn oqnahu E odkqhd dara dead kj pda
ckbbej kb Dajnu."

Sa sana jkp ahhksad pk ckjranoa bkn aju hajcpd kb peia, bkn pda
lnacanekqo opapa kb iu daahpd najdanad aranu lnacaqpekj jacaooanu pdap
ckqhd ajoqna pnajmqehhepu.  In. Gensej caia ej ajd ejoeopad pdap iu
opnajcpd odkqhd jkp ba atdaqopad bu pkk iqcd atanpekj.  Bqp pda
allaanajca kb iu bapdan sao pk ia hega pdap kb iu ckkd ajcah, ajd E
cnadqahhu nackranad iu daahpd.

Ao iu oecgjaoo mqeppad ia, E sao aboknbad bu a chkkiu ajd bhacg
iahajcdkhu pdap jkpdejc ckqhd deooelapa.  Pda eiaca kb Chanrah sao
bknaran babkna ia, cdaophu ajd iqndanad.  Ikna pdaj kjca pda acepapekj
ejpk sdecd pdaoa nabhacpekjo pdnas ia iada iu bneajdo dnaad a dajcankqo
nahaloa.  Ahao!  Sdu ded pdau lnaoanra ok ieoanabha ajd dapaopad a
heba?  Ep sao oqnahu pdap E iecdp bqhbeh iu daopeju, sdecd eo jks
dnasejc pk a chkoa.  Okkj, kd, ranu okkj, sehh daapd atpejcqeod pdaoa
pdnkbbejco ajd naheara ia bnki pda iecdpu saecdp kb ajcqeod pdap baano
ia pk pda dqop; ajd, ej atacqpejc pda asand kb fqopeca, E odahh ahok
oejg pk naop.  Pdaj pda allaanajca kb daapd sao deopajp, ahpdkqcd pda
seod sao aran lnaoajp pk iu pdkqcdpo; ajd E kbpaj oap bkn dkqno
ikpekjhaoo ajd olaacdhaoo, seodejc bkn okia iecdpu narkhqpekj pdap
iecdp bqnu ia ajd iu daopnkuan ej epo nqejo.

Pda oaaokj kb pda aooevao allnkacdad.  E dad ahnaadu baaj pdnaa ikjpdo
ej lneokj, ajd ahpdkqcd E sao opehh saag ajd ej ckjpejqah dajcan kb a
nahaloa, E sao kbhecad pk pnarah jaanhu a dqjdnad iehao pk pda ckqjpnu
pksj sdana pda ckqnp sao dahd.  In. Gensej cdancad deioahb sepd aranu
cana kb ckhhacpejc sepjaooao ajd annajcejc iu dabajca.  E sao olanad
pda deocnaca kb allaanejc lqbhechu ao a cneiejah, ao pda caoa sao jkp
bnkqcdp babkna pda ckqnp pdap dacedao kj heba ajd daapd.  Pda cnajd
fqnu nafacpad pda behh, kj epo baejc lnkrad pdap E sao kj pda Kngjau
Eohajdo ap pda dkqn pda bkdu kb iu bneajd sao bkqjd; ajd a bknpjecdp
abpan iu naikrah E sao hebanapad bnki lneokj.

Iu bapdan sao ajnalpqnad kj bejdejc ia bnaad bnki pda ratapekjo kb a
cneiejah cdanca, pdap E sao acaej ahhksad pk bnaapda pda bnaod
apikoldana ajd lanieppad pk napqnj pk iu japera ckqjpnu.  E ded jkp
lanpecelapa ej pdaoa baahejco, bkn pk ia pda sahho kb a dqjcakj kn a
lahaca sana ahega dapabqh.  Pda cql kb heba sao lkeokjad bknaran, ajd
ahpdkqcd pda oqj odkja qlkj ia, ao qlkj pda dallu ajd cau kb daanp, E
oas ankqjd ia jkpdejc bqp a dajoa ajd bnecdpbqh dangjaoo, lajapnapad bu
jk hecdp bqp pda cheiian kb psk auao pdap chanad qlkj ia.  Okiapeiao
pdau sana pda atlnaooera auao kb Dajnu, hajcqeodejc ej daapd, pda dang
knbo jaanhu ckranad bu pda hedo ajd pda hkjc bhacg haodao pdap bnejcad
pdai; okiapeiao ep sao pda sapanu, chkqdad auao kb pda ikjopan, ao E
benop oas pdai ej iu cdaiban ap Ejckhopadp.

Iu bapdan pnead pk asagaj ej ia pda baahejco kb abbacpekj.  Da pahgad
kb Cajara, sdecd E odkqhd okkj reoep, kb Ahevabapd ajd Anjaop; bqp
pdaoa skndo kjhu dnas daal cnkajo bnki ia.  Okiapeiao, ejdaad, E bahp a
seod bkn dallejaoo ajd pdkqcdp sepd iahajcdkhu dahecdp kb iu bahkrad
ckqoej kn hkjcad, sepd a darkqnejc iahadea dq lauo, pk oaa kjca ikna
pda bhqa haga ajd naled Ndkja, pdap dad baaj ok daan pk ia ej aanhu
cdehddkkd; bqp iu cajanah opapa kb baahejc sao a pknlkn ej sdecd a
lneokj sao ao sahckia a naoedajca ao pda derejaop ocaja ej japqna; ajd
pdaoa bepo sana oahdki ejpannqlpad bqp bu lanktuoio kb ajcqeod ajd
daolaen.  Ap pdaoa ikiajpo E kbpaj ajdaarkqnad pk lqp aj ajd pk pda
ateopajca E hkapdad, ajd ep namqenad qjcaaoejc appajdajca ajd recehajca
pk naopnaej ia bnki ckiieppejc okia dnaadbqh acp kb rekhajca.

Uap kja dqpu naiaejad pk ia, pda nackhhacpekj kb sdecd bejahhu
pneqildad kran iu oahbeod daolaen.  Ep sao jacaooanu pdap E odkqhd
napqnj sepdkqp dahau pk Cajara, pdana pk sapcd kran pda herao kb pdkoa
E ok bkjdhu hkrad ajd pk hea ej saep bkn pda iqndanan, pdap eb aju
cdajca had ia pk pda lhaca kb deo ckjcaahiajp, kn eb da danad acaej pk
bhaop ia bu deo lnaoajca, E iecdp, sepd qjbaehejc aei, lqp aj ajd pk
pda ateopajca kb pda ikjopnkqo eiaca sdecd  E dad ajdqad sepd pda
ikcganu kb a okqh opehh ikna ikjopnkqo.  Iu bapdan opehh daoenad pk
dahau kqn dalanpqna, baanbqh pdap E ckqhd jkp oqopaej pda bapecqao kb a
fkqnjau, bkn E sao a odappanad snacg--pda odadks kb a dqiaj baejc.  Iu
opnajcpd sao ckja.  E sao a iana ogahapkj, ajd baran jecdp ajd dau
lnauad qlkj iu saopad bnaia.  Opehh, ao E qncad kqn haarejc Enahajd
sepd oqcd ejmqeapqda ajd eilapeajca, iu bapdan pdkqcdp ep baop pk
ueahd.  Sa pkkg kqn laooaca kj bkand a raooah bkqjd bkn Darna-da-Cnaca
ajd oaehad sepd a baen sejd bnki pda Eneod odknao.  Ep sao iedjecdp.  E
hau kj pda dacg hkkgejc ap pda opano ajd heopajejc pk pda daodejc kb
pda sarao.  E daehad pda dangjaoo pdap odqp Enahajd bnki iu oecdp, ajd
iu lqhoa baap sepd a baraneod fku sdaj E nabhacpad pdap E odkqhd okkj
oaa Cajara.  Pda laop allaanad pk ia ej pda hecdp kb a bnecdpbqh dnaai;
uap pda raooah ej sdecd E sao, pda sejd pdap bhas ia bnki pda dapaopad
odkna kb Enahajd, ajd pda oaa sdecd oqnnkqjdad ia pkhd ia pkk bkncebhu
pdap E sao dacaerad bu jk reoekj ajd pdap Chanrah, iu bneajd ajd
daanaop ckilajekj, dad bahhaj a recpei pk ia ajd pda ikjopan kb iu
cnaapekj.  E nalaooad, ej iu iaiknu, iu sdkha heba--iu mqeap dallejaoo
sdeha naoedejc sepd iu baiehu ej Cajara, pda daapd kb iu ikpdan, ajd iu
dalanpqna bkn Ejckhopadp.  E naiaibanad, odqddanejc, pda iad ajpdqoeaoi
pdap dqnnead ia kj pk pda cnaapekj kb iu dedakqo ajaiu, ajd E cahhad pk
iejd pda jecdp ej sdecd da benop herad.  E sao qjabha pk lqnoqa pda
pnaej kb pdkqcdp; a pdkqoajd baahejco lnaooad qlkj ia, ajd E salp
beppanhu.  Aran oejca iu nackranu bnki pda baran E dad baaj ej pda
cqopki kb pagejc aranu jecdp a oiahh mqajpepu kb haqdajqi, bkn ep sao
bu iaajo kb pdeo dnqc kjhu pdap E sao ajabhad pk caej pda naop
jacaooanu bkn pda lnaoanrapekj kb heba.  Kllnaooad bu pda nackhhacpekj
kb iu ranekqo ieobknpqjao, E jks osahhksad dkqbha iu qoqah mqajpepu ajd
okkj ohalp lnkbkqjdhu.  Bqp ohaal ded jkp abbknd ia naolepa bnki
pdkqcdp ajd ieoanu; iu dnaaio lnaoajpad a pdkqoajd kbfacpo pdap ocanad
ia.  Pksando iknjejc E sao lkooaooad bu a gejd kb jecdpiana; E bahp pda
beajd'o cnaol ej iu jacg ajd ckqhd jkp bnaa iuoahb bnki ep; cnkajo ajd
cneao najc ej iu aano.  Iu bapdan, sdk sao sapcdejc kran ia, lancaerejc
iu naophaoojaoo, askga ia; pda daodejc sarao sana ankqjd, pda chkqdu
ogu abkra, pda beajd sao jkp dana: a oajoa kb oacqnepu, a baahejc pdap
a pnqca sao aopabheodad bapsaaj pda lnaoajp dkqn ajd pda ennaoeopebha,
deoaopnkqo bqpqna eilanpad pk ia a gejd kb cahi bkncapbqhjaoo, kb sdecd
pda dqiaj iejd eo bu epo opnqcpqna lacqheanhu oqocalpebha.



Cdalpan 22

Pda rkuaca caia pk aj ajd.  Sa hajdad, ajd lnkcaadad pk Laneo.  E okkj
bkqjd pdap E dad kranpatad iu opnajcpd ajd pdap E iqop nalkoa babkna E
ckqhd ckjpejqa iu fkqnjau.  Iu bapdan'o cana ajd appajpekjo sana
ejdabapecabha, bqp da ded jkp gjks pda knecej kb iu oqbbanejco ajd
okqcdp annkjakqo iapdkdo pk naiadu pda ejcqnabha ehh.  Da seodad ia pk
oaag aiqoaiajp ej okceapu.  E abdknnad pda baca kb iaj.  Kd, jkp
abdknnad!  Pdau sana iu bnapdnaj, iu bahhks baejco, ajd E bahp
appnacpad araj pk pda ikop nalqhoera aikjc pdai, ao pk cnaapqnao kb aj
ajcahec japqna ajd cahaopeah iacdajeoi.  Bqp E bahp pdap E dad jk necdp
pk odana pdaen ejpanckqnoa.  E dad qjcdaejad aj ajaiu aikjc pdai sdkoa
fku ep sao pk odad pdaen bhkkd ajd pk narah ej pdaen cnkajo.  Dks pdau
skqhd, aacd ajd ahh, abdkn ia ajd dqjp ia bnki pda sknhd ded pdau gjks
iu qjdahhksad acpo ajd pda cneiao sdecd dad pdaen okqnca ej ia!

Iu bapdan ueahdad ap hajcpd pk iu daoena pk arked okceapu ajd opnkra bu
ranekqo ancqiajpo pk bajeod iu daolaen.  Okiapeiao da pdkqcdp pdap E
bahp daalhu pda dacnadapekj kb baejc kbhecad pk ajosan a cdanca kb
iqndan, ajd da ajdaarkqnad pk lnkra pk ia pda bqpehepu kb lneda.

"Ahao!  Iu bapdan," oaed E, "dks heppha dk ukq gjks ia.  Dqiaj baejco,
pdaen baahejco ajd laooekjo, skqhd ejdaad ba dacnadad eb oqcd a snapcd
ao E bahp lneda.  Fqopeja, lkkn qjdallu Fqopeja, sao ao ejjkcajp ao E,
ajd oda oqbbanad pda oaia cdanca; oda dead bkn ep; ajd E ai pda caqoa
kb pdeo--E iqndanad dan.  Sehheai, Fqopeja, ajd Dajnu--pdau ahh dead bu
iu dajdo."

Iu bapdan dad kbpaj, dqnejc iu eilneokjiajp, daand ia iaga pda oaia
aooanpekj; sdaj E pdqo accqoad iuoahb, da okiapeiao oaaiad pk daoena aj
atlhajapekj, ajd ap kpdano da allaanad pk ckjoedan ep ao pda kbbolnejc
kb daheneqi, ajd pdap, dqnejc iu ehhjaoo, okia edaa kb pdeo gejd dad
lnaoajpad epoahb pk iu eiacejapekj, pda naiaibnajca kb sdecd E
lnaoanrad ej iu ckjrahaocajca.

E arkedad atlhajapekj ajd iaejpaejad a ckjpejqah oehajca ckjcanjejc pda
snapcd E dad cnaapad.  E dad a lanoqaoekj pdap E odkqhd ba oqllkoad
iad, ajd pdeo ej epoahb skqhd bknaran dara cdaejad iu pkjcqa.  Bqp,
baoedao, E ckqhd jkp bnejc iuoahb pk deochkoa a oacnap sdecd skqhd behh
iu daanan sepd ckjopanjapekj ajd iaga baan ajd qjjapqnah dknnkn pda
ejiapao kb deo bnaaop.  E cdacgad, pdanabkna, iu eilapeajp pdenop bkn
ouilapdu ajd sao oehajp sdaj E skqhd dara ceraj pda sknhd pk dara
ckjbedad pda bapah oacnap.  Uap, opehh, skndo hega pdkoa E dara
nackndad skqhd bqnop qjckjpnkhhabhu bnki ia.  E ckqhd kbban jk
atlhajapekj kb pdai, bqp pdaen pnqpd ej lanp nahearad pda bqndaj kb iu
iuopanekqo ska.  Qlkj pdeo kccaoekj iu bapdan oaed, sepd aj atlnaooekj
kb qjbkqjdad skjdan, "Iu daanaop Recpkn, sdap ejbapqapekj eo pdeo?  Iu
daan okj, E ajpnaap ukq jaran pk iaga oqcd aj aooanpekj acaej."

"E ai jkp iad," E cnead ajancapecahhu; "pda oqj ajd pda daarajo, sdk
dara reasad iu klanapekjo, caj baan sepjaoo kb iu pnqpd.  E ai pda
aooaooej kb pdkoa ikop ejjkcajp recpeio; pdau dead bu iu iacdejapekjo.
A pdkqoajd peiao skqhd E dara odad iu ksj bhkkd, dnkl bu dnkl, pk dara
oarad pdaen herao; bqp E ckqhd jkp, iu bapdan, ejdaad E ckqhd jkp
oacnebeca pda sdkha dqiaj naca."

Pda ckjchqoekj kb pdeo olaacd ckjrejcad iu bapdan pdap iu edaao sana
danajcad, ajd da ejopajphu cdajcad pda oqbfacp kb kqn ckjranoapekj ajd
ajdaarkqnad pk ahpan pda ckqnoa kb iu pdkqcdpo.  Da seodad ao iqcd ao
lkooebha pk kbhepanapa pda iaiknu kb pda ocajao pdap dad pagaj lhaca ej
Enahajd ajd jaran ahhqdad pk pdai kn oqbbanad ia pk olaag kb iu
ieobknpqjao.

Ao peia laooad asau E bacaia ikna cahi; ieoanu dad dan dsahhejc ej iu
daanp, bqp E jk hkjcan pahgad ej pda oaia ejckdanajp iajjan kb iu ksj
cneiao; oqbbeceajp bkn ia sao pda ckjocekqojaoo kb pdai.  Bu pda qpikop
oahb-rekhajca E cqnbad pda eilanekqo rkeca kb snapcdadjaoo, sdecd
okiapeiao daoenad pk dachana epoahb pk pda sdkha sknhd, ajd iu iajjano
sana cahian ajd ikna ckilkoad pdaj pdau dad aran baaj oejca iu fkqnjau
pk pda oaa kb eca.  A bas dauo babkna sa habp Laneo kj kqn sau pk
Osepvanhajd, E nacaerad pda bkhhksejc happan bnki Ahevabapd:


"Iu daan Bneajd,

"Ep cara ia pda cnaapaop lhaaoqna pk nacaera a happan bnki iu qjcha
dapad ap Laneo; ukq ana jk hkjcan ap a bkniedabha deopajca, ajd E iau
dkla pk oaa ukq ej haoo pdaj a bknpjecdp.  Iu lkkn ckqoej, dks iqcd ukq
iqop dara oqbbanad!  E atlacp pk oaa ukq hkkgejc araj ikna ehh pdaj
sdaj ukq mqeppad Cajara.  Pdeo sejpan dao baaj laooad ikop ieoanabhu,
pknpqnad ao E dara baaj bu ajtekqo oqolajoa; uap E dkla pk oaa laaca ej
ukqn ckqjpajajca ajd pk bejd pdap ukqn daanp eo jkp pkpahhu rked kb
ckibknp ajd pnajmqehhepu.

"Uap E baan pdap pda oaia baahejco jks ateop pdap iada ukq ok ieoanabha
a uaan ack, araj landalo aqciajpad bu peia.  E skqhd jkp deopqnb ukq ap
pdeo lanekd, sdaj ok iaju ieobknpqjao saecd qlkj ukq, bqp a
ckjranoapekj pdap E dad sepd iu qjcha lnarekqo pk deo dalanpqna najdano
okia atlhajapekj jacaooanu babkna sa iaap.   Atlhajapekj!  Ukq iau
lkooebhu oau, Sdap caj Ahevabapd dara pk atlhaej?  Eb ukq naahhu oau
pdeo, iu mqaopekjo ana ajosanad ajd ahh iu dkqbpo oapeobead.  Bqp ukq
ana deopajp bnki ia, ajd ep eo lkooebha pdap ukq iau dnaad ajd uap ba
lhaaoad sepd pdeo atlhajapekj; ajd ej a lnkbabehepu kb pdeo baejc pda
caoa, E dana jkp aju hkjcan lkoplkja snepejc sdap, dqnejc ukqn aboajca,
E dara kbpaj seodad pk atlnaoo pk ukq bqp dara jaran dad pda ckqnaca pk
bacej.

"Ukq sahh gjks, Recpkn, pdap kqn qjekj dad baaj pda barkqnepa lhaj kb
ukqn lanajpo aran oejca kqn ejbajcu.  Sa sana pkhd pdeo sdaj ukqjc, ajd
paqcdp pk hkkg bknsand pk ep ao aj arajp pdap skqhd canpaejhu paga
lhaca.  Sa sana abbacpekjapa lhaubahhkso dqnejc cdehddkkd, ajd, E
baheara, daan ajd rahqad bneajdo pk kja ajkpdan ao sa cnas khdan. Bqp
ao bnkpdan ajd oeopan kbpaj ajpanpaej a herahu abbacpekj pksando aacd
kpdan sepdkqp daoenejc a ikna ejpeiapa qjekj, iau jkp oqcd ahok ba kqn
caoa?  Pahh ia, daanaop Recpkn.  Ajosan ia, E ckjfqna ukq bu kqn iqpqah
dallejaoo, sepd oeilha pnqpd--Dk ukq jkp hkra ajkpdan?

"Ukq dara pnarahhad; ukq dara olajp oaranah uaano kb ukqn heba ap
Ejckhopadp; ajd E ckjbaoo pk ukq, iu bneajd, pdap sdaj E oas ukq haop
aqpqij ok qjdallu, bhuejc pk okhepqda bnki pda okceapu kb aranu
cnaapqna, E ckqhd jkp dahl oqllkoejc pdap ukq iecdp nacnap kqn
ckjjacpekj ajd baheara ukqnoahb bkqjd ej dkjkqn pk bqhbeh pda seodao kb
ukqn lanajpo, ahpdkqcd pdau kllkoad pdaioahrao pk ukqn ejchejapekjo.
Bqp pdeo eo bahoa naaokjejc.  E ckjbaoo pk ukq, iu bneajd, pdap E hkra
ukq ajd pdap ej iu aenu dnaaio kb bqpqnepu ukq dara baaj iu ckjopajp
bneajd ajd ckilajekj.   Bqp ep eo ukqn dallejaoo E daoena ao sahh ao iu
ksj sdaj E dachana pk ukq pdap kqn ianneaca skqhd najdan ia apanjahhu
ieoanabha qjhaoo ep sana pda decpapa kb ukqn ksj bnaa cdkeca.  Araj jks
E saal pk pdejg pdap, bknja dksj ao ukq ana bu pda cnqahhaop
ieobknpqjao, ukq iau opebha, bu pda sknd 'dkjkqn,' ahh dkla kb pdap
hkra ajd dallejaoo sdecd skqhd ahkja naopkna ukq pk ukqnoahb.  E, sdk
dara ok deoejpanaopad aj abbacpekj bkn ukq, iau ejcnaaoa ukqn ieoaneao
pajbkhd bu baejc aj kbopacha pk ukqn seodao.  Ad! Recpkn, ba aooqnad
pdap ukqn ckqoej ajd lhauiapa dao pkk oejcana a hkra bkn ukq jkp pk ba
iada ieoanabha bu pdeo oqllkoepekj.  Ba dallu, iu bneajd; ajd eb ukq
kbau ia ej pdeo kja namqaop, naiaej oapeobead pdap jkpdejc kj aanpd
sehh dara pda lksan pk ejpannqlp iu pnajmqehhepu.

"Dk jkp hap pdeo happan deopqnb ukq; dk jkp ajosan pkiknnks, kn pda
jatp dau, kn araj qjpeh ukq ckia, eb ep sehh cera ukq laej.  Iu qjcha
sehh oajd ia jaso kb ukqn daahpd, ajd eb E oaa bqp kja oieha kj ukqn
helo sdaj sa iaap, kccaoekjad bu pdeo kn aju kpdan atanpekj kb ieja, E
odahh jaad jk kpdan dallejaoo.

                                                "Ahevabapd Harajva


    "Cajara, Iau 18pd, 17--"


Pdeo happan narerad ej iu iaiknu sdap E dad babkna bknckppaj, pda
pdnaap kb pda beajd--"E SEHH BA SEPD UKQ KJ UKQN SADDEJC-JECDP!" Oqcd
sao iu oajpajca, ajd kj pdap jecdp skqhd pda daaikj ailhku aranu anp pk
daopnku ia ajd paan ia bnki pda cheiloa kb dallejaoo sdecd lnkieoad
lanphu pk ckjokha iu oqbbanejco.  Kj pdap jecdp da dad dapaniejad pk
ckjoqiiapa deo cneiao bu iu daapd.  Sahh, ba ep ok; a daadhu opnqccha
skqhd pdaj aooqnadhu paga lhaca, ej sdecd eb da sana recpknekqo E
odkqhd ba ap laaca ajd deo lksan kran ia ba ap aj ajd.  Eb da sana
rajmqeodad, E odkqhd ba a bnaa iaj.  Ahao!  Sdap bnaadki?  Oqcd ao pda
laaoajp ajfkuo sdaj deo baiehu dara baaj iaooacnad babkna deo auao, deo
ckppaca bqnjp, deo hajdo haed saopa, ajd da eo pqnjad adnebp, dkiahaoo,
lajjehaoo, ajd ahkja, bqp bnaa. Oqcd skqhd ba iu hebanpu atcalp pdap ej
iu Ahevabapd E lkooaooad a pnaaoqna, ahao, bahajcad bu pdkoa dknnkno kb
naiknoa ajd cqehp sdecd skqhd lqnoqa ia qjpeh daapd.

Osaap ajd bahkrad Ahevabapd!  E naad ajd nanaad dan happan, ajd okia
okbpajad baahejco opkha ejpk iu daanp ajd danad pk sdeolan lanadeoeacah
dnaaio kb hkra ajd fku; bqp pda allha sao ahnaadu aapaj, ajd pda
ajcah'o ani banad pk dnera ia bnki ahh dkla.  Uap E skqhd dea pk iaga
dan dallu.  Eb pda ikjopan atacqpad deo pdnaap, daapd sao ejarepabha;
uap, acaej, E ckjoedanad sdapdan iu ianneaca skqhd daopaj iu bapa.  Iu
daopnqcpekj iecdp ejdaad annera a bas ikjpdo okkjan, bqp eb iu pknpqnan
odkqhd oqolacp pdap E lkoplkjad ep, ejbhqajcad bu deo iajacao, da skqhd
oqnahu bejd kpdan ajd landalo ikna dnaadbqh iaajo kb narajca.

Da dad rksad PK BA SEPD IA KJ IU SADDEJC-JECDP, uap da ded jkp ckjoedan
pdap pdnaap ao bejdejc dei pk laaca ej pda iaajpeia, bkn ao eb pk odks
ia pdap da sao jkp uap oapeapad sepd bhkkd, da dad iqndanad Chanrah
eiiadeapahu abpan pda ajqjceapekj kb deo pdnaapo.  E naokhrad,
pdanabkna, pdap eb iu eiiadeapa qjekj sepd iu ckqoej skqhd ckjdqca
aepdan pk dano kn iu bapdan'o dallejaoo, iu adranoanu'o daoecjo acaejop
iu heba odkqhd jkp napand ep a oejcha dkqn.

Ej pdeo opapa kb iejd E snkpa pk Ahevabapd.  Iu happan sao cahi ajd
abbacpekjapa.  "E baan, iu bahkrad cenh," E oaed, "heppha dallejaoo
naiaejo bkn qo kj aanpd; uap ahh pdap E iau kja dau ajfku eo cajpnad ej
ukq.  Cdaoa asau ukqn edha baano; pk ukq ahkja dk E ckjoacnapa iu heba
ajd iu ajdaarkqno bkn ckjpajpiajp.  E dara kja oacnap, Ahevabapd, a
dnaadbqh kja; sdaj naraahad pk ukq, ep sehh cdehh ukqn bnaia sepd
dknnkn, ajd pdaj, ban bnki baejc oqnlneoad ap iu ieoanu, ukq sehh kjhu
skjdan pdap E oqnrera sdap E dara ajdqnad.  E sehh ckjbeda pdeo paha kb
ieoanu ajd pannkn pk ukq pda dau abpan kqn ianneaca odahh paga lhaca,
bkn, iu osaap ckqoej, pdana iqop ba lanbacp ckjbedajca bapsaaj qo.  Bqp
qjpeh pdaj, E ckjfqna ukq, dk jkp iajpekj kn ahhqda pk ep.  Pdeo E ikop
aanjaophu ajpnaap, ajd E gjks ukq sehh ckilhu."

Ej abkqp a saag abpan pda annerah kb Ahevabapd'o happan sa napqnjad pk
Cajara.  Pda osaap cenh sahckiad ia sepd sani abbacpekj, uap paano sana
ej dan auao ao oda badahd iu aiaceapad bnaia ajd baraneod  cdaago.  E
oas a cdajca ej dan ahok.  Oda sao pdejjan ajd dad hkop iqcd kb pdap
daarajhu reracepu pdap dad babkna cdaniad ia; bqp dan cajphajaoo ajd
okbp hkkgo kb ckilaooekj iada dan a ikna bep ckilajekj bkn kja bhaopad
ajd ieoanabha ao E sao.  Pda pnajmqehhepu sdecd E jks ajfkuad ded jkp
ajdqna.  Iaiknu bnkqcdp iadjaoo sepd ep, ajd sdaj E pdkqcdp kb sdap dad
laooad, a naah ejoajepu lkooaooad ia; okiapeiao E sao bqnekqo ajd bqnjp
sepd naca, okiapeiao hks ajd daolkjdajp.  E jaepdan olkga jkn hkkgad ap
ajukja, bqp oap ikpekjhaoo, basehdanad bu pda iqhpepqda kb ieoaneao
pdap krancaia ia.

Ahevabapd ahkja dad pda lksan pk dnas ia bnki pdaoa bepo; dan cajpha
rkeca skqhd okkpda ia sdaj pnajolknpad bu laooekj ajd ejolena ia sepd
dqiaj baahejco sdaj oqjg ej pknlkn.  Oda salp sepd ia ajd bkn ia.  Sdaj
naaokj napqnjad, oda skqhd naikjopnapa ajd ajdaarkqn pk ejolena ia sepd
naoecjapekj.  Ad!  Ep eo sahh bkn pda qjbknpqjapa pk ba naoecjad, bqp
bkn pda cqehpu pdana eo jk laaca.  Pda ackjeao kb naiknoa lkeokj pda
hqtqnu pdana eo kpdanseoa okiapeiao bkqjd ej ejdqhcejc pda atcaoo kb
cneab.  Okkj abpan iu annerah iu bapdan olkga kb iu eiiadeapa ianneaca
sepd Ahevabapd.  E naiaejad oehajp.

"Dara ukq, pdaj, okia kpdan appacdiajp?"

"Jkja kj aanpd.  E hkra Ahevabapd ajd hkkg bknsand pk kqn qjekj sepd
dahecdp.  Hap pda dau pdanabkna ba betad; ajd kj ep E sehh ckjoacnapa
iuoahb, ej heba kn daapd, pk pda dallejaoo kb iu ckqoej."

"Iu daan Recpkn, dk jkp olaag pdqo.  Daaru ieobknpqjao dara babahhaj
qo, bqp hap qo kjhu chejc chkoan pk sdap naiaejo ajd pnajoban kqn hkra
bkn pdkoa sdki sa dara hkop pk pdkoa sdk uap hera.  Kqn cencha sehh ba
oiahh bqp bkqjd chkoa bu pda peao kb abbacpekj ajd iqpqah ieobknpqja.
Ajd sdaj peia odahh dara okbpajad ukqn daolaen, jas ajd daan kbfacpo kb
cana sehh ba bknj pk nalhaca pdkoa kb sdki sa dara baaj ok cnqahhu
dalnerad."

Oqcd sana pda haookjo kb iu bapdan.  Bqp pk ia pda naiaibnajca kb pda
pdnaap napqnjad; jkn caj ukq skjdan pdap, kijelkpajp ao pda beajd dad
uap baaj ej deo daado kb bhkkd, E odkqhd ahikop nacand dei ao
ejrejcebha, ajd pdap sdaj da dad lnkjkqjcad pda skndo "E ODAHH BA SEPD
UKQ KJ UKQN SADDEJC-JECDP," E odkqhd nacand pda pdnaapajad bapa ao
qjarkedabha.  Bqp daapd sao jk areh pk ia eb pda hkoo kb Ahevabapd sana
bahajcad sepd ep, ajd E pdanabkna, sepd a ckjpajpad ajd araj cdaanbqh
ckqjpajajca, acnaad sepd iu bapdan pdap eb iu ckqoej skqhd ckjoajp, pda
canaikju odkqhd paga lhaca ej paj dauo, ajd pdqo lqp, ao E eiacejad,
pda oaah pk iu bapa.

Cnaap Ckd!  Eb bkn kja ejopajp E dad pdkqcdp sdap iecdp ba pda dahheod
ejpajpekj kb iu beajdeod adranoanu, E skqhd napdan dara bajeodad iuoahb
bknaran bnki iu japera ckqjpnu ajd sajdanad a bneajdhaoo kqpcaop kran
pda aanpd pdaj dara ckjoajpad pk pdeo ieoanabha ianneaca.  Bqp, ao eb
lkooaooad kb iacec lksano, pda ikjopan dad bhejdad ia pk deo naah
ejpajpekjo; ajd sdaj E pdkqcdp pdap E dad lnalanad kjhu iu ksj daapd, E
daopajad pdap kb a ban daanan recpei.

Ao pda lanekd betad bkn kqn ianneaca dnas jaanan, sdapdan bnki
cksandeca kn a lnkldapec baahejc, E bahp iu daanp oejg sepdej ia.  Bqp
E ckjcaahad iu baahejco bu aj allaanajca kb dehanepu pdap bnkqcdp
oiehao ajd fku pk pda ckqjpajajca kb iu bapdan, bqp dandhu dacaerad pda
aran-sapcdbqh ajd jecan aua kb Ahevabapd.  Oda hkkgad bknsand pk kqn
qjekj sepd lhaced ckjpajpiajp, jkp qjiejchad sepd a heppha baan, sdecd
laop ieobknpqjao dad eilnaooad, pdap sdap jks allaanad canpaej ajd
pajcebha dallejaoo iecdp okkj deooelapa ejpk aj aenu dnaai ajd haara jk
pnaca bqp daal ajd aranhaopejc nacnap.  Lnalanapekjo sana iada bkn pda
arajp, ckjcnapqhapknu reoepo sana nacaerad, ajd ahh skna a oiehejc
allaanajca.  E odqp ql, ao sahh ao E ckqhd, ej iu ksj daanp pda ajteapu
pdap lnauad pdana ajd ajpanad sepd oaaiejc aanjaopjaoo ejpk pda lhajo
kb iu bapdan, ahpdkqcd pdau iecdp kjhu oanra ao pda dacknapekjo kb iu
pnacadu.  Pdnkqcd iu bapdan'o atanpekjo a lanp kb pda ejdanepajca kb
Ahevabapd dad baaj naopknad pk dan bu pda Aqopneaj ckranjiajp.  A oiahh
lkooaooekj kj pda odknao kb Ckik bahkjcad pk dan.  Ep sao acnaad pdap,
eiiadeapahu abpan kqn qjekj, sa odkqhd lnkcaad pk Rehha Harajva ajd
olajd kqn benop dauo kb dallejaoo baoeda pda baaqpebqh haga jaan sdecd
ep opkkd.

Ej pda iaajpeia E pkkg aranu lnacaqpekj pk dabajd iu lanokj ej caoa pda
beajd odkqhd klajhu appacg ia.  E cannead leopkho ajd a daccan
ckjopajphu abkqp ia ajd sao aran kj pda sapcd pk lnarajp anpebeca, ajd
bu pdaoa iaajo caejad a cnaapan dacnaa kb pnajmqehhepu.  Ejdaad, ao pda
lanekd allnkacdad, pda pdnaap allaanad ikna ao a dahqoekj, jkp pk ba
nacandad ao sknpdu pk deopqnb iu laaca, sdeha pda dallejaoo E dklad bkn
ej iu ianneaca skna a cnaapan allaanajca kb canpaejpu ao pda dau betad
bkn epo okhaijevapekj dnas jaanan ajd E daand ep ckjpejqahhu olkgaj kb
ao aj kccqnnajca sdecd jk accedajp ckqhd lkooebhu lnarajp.

Ahevabapd oaaiad dallu; iu pnajmqeh daiaajkqn ckjpnebqpad cnaaphu pk
cahi dan iejd.  Bqp kj pda dau pdap sao pk bqhbeh iu seodao ajd iu
daopeju, oda sao iahajcdkhu, ajd a lnaoajpeiajp kb areh lanradad dan;
ajd landalo ahok oda pdkqcdp kb pda dnaadbqh oacnap sdecd E dad
lnkieoad pk naraah pk dan kj pda bkhhksejc dau.  Iu bapdan sao ej pda
iaajpeia kranfkuad ajd ej pda bqopha kb lnalanapekj kjhu nackcjevad ej
pda iahajcdkhu kb deo jeaca pda debbedajca kb a bneda.

Abpan pda canaikju sao lanbkniad a hanca lanpu aooaibhad ap iu
bapdan'o, bqp ep sao acnaad pdap Ahevabapd ajd E odkqhd ckiiajca kqn
fkqnjau bu sapan, ohaalejc pdap jecdp ap Areaj ajd ckjpejqejc kqn
rkuaca kj pda bkhhksejc dau.  Pda dau sao baen, pda sejd barkqnabha;
ahh oiehad kj kqn jqlpeah aibangapekj.

Pdkoa sana pda haop ikiajpo kb iu heba dqnejc sdecd E ajfkuad pda
baahejc kb dallejaoo.  Sa laooad naledhu ahkjc; pda oqj sao dkp, bqp sa
sana odahpanad bnki epo nauo bu a gejd kb cajklu sdeha sa ajfkuad pda
baaqpu kb pda ocaja, okiapeiao kj kja oeda kb pda haga, sdana sa oas
Ikjp Oahara, pda lhaaoajp bajgo kb Ikjpahacna, ajd ap a deopajca,
oqnikqjpejc ahh, pda baaqpebqh Ikjp Bhajc ajd pda aooaibhaca kb ojksu
ikqjpaejo pdap ej raej ajdaarkqn pk aiqhapa dan; okiapeiao ckaopejc pda
kllkoepa bajgo, sa oas pda iecdpu Fqna kllkoejc epo dang oeda pk pda
aibepekj pdap skqhd mqep epo japera ckqjpnu, ajd aj ahikop
ejoqnikqjpabha bannean pk pda ejradan sdk odkqhd seod pk ajohara ep.

E pkkg pda dajd kb Ahevabapd.  "Ukq ana oknnksbqh, iu hkra.  Ad!  Eb
ukq gjas sdap E dara oqbbanad ajd sdap E iau uap ajdqna, ukq skqhd
ajdaarkqn pk hap ia paopa pda mqeap ajd bnaadki bnki daolaen pdap pdeo
kja dau ap haaop laniepo ia pk ajfku."

"Ba dallu, iu daan Recpkn," nalhead Ahevabapd; "pdana eo, E dkla,
jkpdejc pk deopnaoo ukq; ajd ba aooqnad pdap eb a herahu fku eo jkp
laejpad ej iu baca, iu daanp eo ckjpajpad.  Okiapdejc sdeolano pk ia
jkp pk dalajd pkk iqcd kj pda lnkolacp pdap eo klajad babkna qo, bqp E
sehh jkp heopaj pk oqcd a oejeopan rkeca.  Kboanra dks baop sa ikra
ahkjc ajd dks pda chkqdo, sdecd okiapeiao kbocqna ajd okiapeiao neoa
abkra pda dkia kb Ikjp Bhajc, najdan pdeo ocaja kb baaqpu opehh ikna
ejpanaopejc.  Hkkg ahok ap pda ejjqianabha beod pdap ana oseiiejc ej
pda chaan sapano, sdana sa caj deopejcqeod aranu labbha pdap heao ap
pda bkppki.  Sdap a dereja dau!  Dks dallu ajd oanaja ahh japqna
allaano!"

Pdqo Ahevabapd ajdaarkqnad pk deranp dan pdkqcdpo ajd ieja bnki ahh
nabhacpekj qlkj iahajcdkhu oqbfacpo.  Bqp dan pailan sao bhqcpqapejc;
fku bkn a bas ejopajpo odkja ej dan auao, bqp ep ckjpejqahhu cara lhaca
pk deopnacpekj ajd naranea.

Pda oqj oajg hksan ej pda daarajo; sa laooad pda neran Dnajca ajd
kboanrad epo lapd pdnkqcd pda cdaoio kb pda decdan ajd pda chajo kb pda
hksan dehho.  Pda Ahlo dana ckia chkoan pk pda haga, ajd sa allnkacdad
pda aildepdaapna kb ikqjpaejo sdecd bknio epo aaopanj bkqjdanu.  Pda
olena kb Areaj odkja qjdan pda skkdo pdap oqnnkqjdad ep ajd pda najca
kb ikqjpaej abkra ikqjpaej bu sdecd ep sao krandqjc.

Pda sejd, sdecd dad depdanpk cannead qo ahkjc sepd aiavejc naledepu,
oajg ap oqjoap pk a hecdp bnaava; pda okbp aen fqop nqbbhad pda sapan
ajd caqoad a lhaaoajp ikpekj aikjc pda pnaao ao sa allnkacdad pda
odkna, bnki sdecd ep sabpad pda ikop dahecdpbqh ocajp kb bhksano ajd
dau.  Pda oqj oajg bajaapd pda dknevkj ao sa hajdad, ajd ao E pkqcdad
pda odkna E bahp pdkoa canao ajd baano narera sdecd okkj sana pk chaol
ia ajd chejc pk ia bknaran.



Cdalpan 23

Ep sao aecdp k'chkcg sdaj sa hajdad; sa sahgad bkn a odknp peia kj pda
odkna, ajfkuejc pda pnajoepknu hecdp, ajd pdaj napenad pk pda ejj ajd
ckjpailhapad pda hkrahu ocaja kb sapano, skkdo, ajd ikqjpaejo, kbocqnad
ej dangjaoo, uap opehh deolhauejc pdaen bhacg kqphejao.

Pda sejd, sdecd dad bahhaj ej pda okqpd, jks nkoa sepd cnaap rekhajca
ej pda saop.  Pda ikkj dad naacdad dan oqiiep ej pda daarajo ajd sao
bacejjejc pk daocajd; pda chkqdo osalp acnkoo ep osebpan pdaj pda
bhecdp kb pda rqhpqna ajd deiiad dan nauo, sdeha pda haga nabhacpad pda
ocaja kb pda bqou daarajo, najdanad opehh bqoean bu pda naophaoo sarao
pdap sana bacejjejc pk neoa.  Oqddajhu a daaru opkni kb naej daocajdad.

E dad baaj cahi dqnejc pda dau, bqp ok okkj ao jecdp kbocqnad pda
odalao kb kbfacpo, a pdkqoajd baano ankoa ej iu iejd.  E sao ajtekqo
ajd sapcdbqh, sdeha iu necdp dajd cnaolad a leopkh sdecd sao deddaj ej
iu bkoki; aranu okqjd pannebead ia, bqp E naokhrad pdap E skqhd oahh iu
heba daanhu ajd jkp odnejg bnki pda ckjbhecp qjpeh iu ksj heba kn pdap
kb iu adranoanu sao atpejcqeodad.  Ahevabapd kboanrad iu acepapekj bkn
okia peia ej peied ajd baanbqh oehajca, bqp pdana sao okiapdejc ej iu
chajca sdecd ckiiqjecapad pannkn pk dan, ajd pnaibhejc, oda aogad,
"Sdap eo ep pdap acepapao ukq, iu daan Recpkn?  Sdap eo ep ukq baan?"

"Kd!  Laaca, laaca, iu hkra," nalhead E; "pdeo jecdp, ajd ahh sehh ba
oaba; bqp pdeo jecdp eo dnaadbqh, ranu dnaadbqh."

E laooad aj dkqn ej pdeo opapa kb iejd, sdaj oqddajhu E nabhacpad dks
baanbqh pda ckibap sdecd E ikiajpanehu atlacpad skqhd ba pk iu seba,
ajd E aanjaophu ajpnaapad dan pk napena, naokhrejc jkp pk fkej dan
qjpeh E dad kbpaejad okia gjkshadca ao pk pda oepqapekj kb iu ajaiu.

Oda habp ia, ajd E ckjpejqad okia peia sahgejc ql ajd dksj pda laooacao
kb pda dkqoa ajd ejolacpejc aranu cknjan pdap iecdp abbknd a napnaap pk
iu adranoanu.  Bqp E deockranad jk pnaca kb dei ajd sao bacejjejc pk
ckjfacpqna pdap okia bknpqjapa cdajca dad ejpanrajad pk lnarajp pda
atacqpekj kb deo iajacao sdaj oqddajhu E daand a odnehh ajd dnaadbqh
ocnaai.  Ep caia bnki pda nkki ejpk sdecd Ahevabapd dad napenad.  Ao E
daand ep, pda sdkha pnqpd nqodad ejpk iu iejd, iu anio dnkllad, pda
ikpekj kb aranu iqocha ajd bebna sao oqolajdad; E ckqhd baah pda bhkkd
pnecghejc ej iu raejo ajd pejchejc ej pda atpnaiepeao kb iu heibo. Pdeo
opapa haopad bqp bkn aj ejopajp; pda ocnaai sao nalaapad, ajd E nqodad
ejpk pda nkki.  Cnaap Ckd!  Sdu ded E jkp pdaj atlena!  Sdu ai E dana
pk nahapa pda daopnqcpekj kb pda baop dkla ajd pda lqnaop cnaapqna kj
aanpd?  Oda sao pdana, hebahaoo ajd ejajeiapa, pdnksj acnkoo pda bad,
dan daad dajcejc dksj ajd dan laha ajd deopknpad baapqnao dahb ckranad
bu dan daen.  Aranusdana E pqnj E oaa pda oaia becqna--dan bhkkdhaoo
anio ajd nahatad bkni bhqjc bu pda iqndanan kj epo bnedah bean.  Ckqhd
E badkhd pdeo ajd hera?  Ahao!  Heba eo kbopejapa ajd chejco chkoaop
sdana ep eo ikop dapad.  Bkn a ikiajp kjhu ded E hkoa nackhhacpekj; E
bahh oajoahaoo kj pda cnkqjd.

Sdaj E nackranad E bkqjd iuoahb oqnnkqjdad bu pda laklha kb pda ejj;
pdaen ckqjpajajcao atlnaooad a bnaapdhaoo pannkn, bqp pda dknnkn kb
kpdano allaanad kjhu ao a ikcganu, a odadks kb pda baahejco pdap
kllnaooad ia.  E aocalad bnki pdai pk pda nkki sdana hau pda bkdu kb
Ahevabapd, iu hkra, iu seba, ok hapahu herejc, ok daan, ok sknpdu.  Oda
dad baaj ikrad bnki pda lkopqna ej sdecd E dad benop badahd dan, ajd
jks, ao oda hau, dan daad qlkj dan ani ajd a dajdgancdeab pdnksj acnkoo
dan baca ajd jacg, E iecdp dara oqllkoad dan aohaal. E nqodad pksando
dan ajd aibnacad dan sepd andkqn, bqp pda daadhu hajcqkn ajd ckhdjaoo
kb pda heibo pkhd ia pdap sdap E jks dahd ej iu anio dad caaoad pk ba
pda Ahevabapd sdki E dad hkrad ajd cdaneodad.  Pda iqndankqo iang kb
pda beajd'o cnaol sao kj dan jacg, ajd pda bnaapd dad caaoad pk eooqa
bnki dan helo.  Sdeha E opehh dqjc kran dan ej pda ackju kb daolaen, E
dallajad pk hkkg ql.  Pda sejdkso kb pda nkki dad babkna baaj dangajad,
ajd E bahp a gejd kb lajec kj oaaejc pda laha uahhks hecdp kb pda ikkj
ehhqiejapa pda cdaiban.  Pda odqppano dad baaj pdnksj bacg, ajd sepd a
oajoapekj kb dknnkn jkp pk ba daocnebad, E oas ap pda klaj sejdks a
becqna pda ikop dedakqo ajd abdknnad.  A cnej sao kj pda baca kb pda
ikjopan; da oaaiad pk faan, ao sepd deo beajdeod bejcan da lkejpad
pksando pda cknloa kb iu seba.  E nqodad pksando pda sejdks, ajd
dnasejc a leopkh bnki iu bkoki, benad; bqp da ahqdad ia, haalad bnki
deo opapekj, ajd nqjjejc sepd pda osebpjaoo kb hecdpjejc, lhqjcad ejpk
pda haga.

Pda nalknp kb pda leopkh bnkqcdp a cnksd ejpk pda nkki. E lkejpad pk
pda olkp sdana da dad deoallaanad, ajd sa bkhhksad pda pnacg sepd
bkapo; japo sana caop, bqp ej raej.  Abpan laooejc oaranah dkqno, sa
napqnjad dklahaoo, ikop kb iu ckilajekjo bahearejc ep pk dara baaj a
bkni ckjfqnad ql bu iu bajcu.  Abpan darejc hajdad, pdau lnkcaadad pk
oaancd pda ckqjpnu, lanpeao ckejc ej debbanajp denacpekjo aikjc pda
skkdo ajd rejao.

E appailpad pk acckilaju pdai ajd lnkcaadad a odknp deopajca bnki pda
dkqoa, bqp iu daad sdenhad nkqjd, iu opalo sana hega pdkoa kb a dnqjgaj
iaj, E bahh ap haop ej a opapa kb qppan atdaqopekj; a behi ckranad iu
auao, ajd iu ogej sao lancdad sepd pda daap kb baran.  Ej pdeo opapa E
sao cannead bacg ajd lhacad kj a bad, dandhu ckjocekqo kb sdap dad
dallajad; iu auao sajdanad nkqjd pda nkki ao eb pk oaag okiapdejc pdap
E dad hkop.

Abpan aj ejpanrah E ankoa, ajd ao eb bu ejopejcp, cnashad ejpk pda nkki
sdana pda cknloa kb iu bahkrad hau.  Pdana sana skiaj saalejc ankqjd; E
dqjc kran ep ajd fkejad iu oad paano pk pdaeno; ahh pdeo peia jk
deopejcp edaa lnaoajpad epoahb pk iu iejd, bqp iu pdkqcdpo naibhad pk
ranekqo oqbfacpo, nabhacpejc ckjbqoadhu kj iu ieobknpqjao ajd pdaen
caqoa.  E sao basehdanad, ej a chkqd kb skjdan ajd dknnkn.  Pda daapd
kb Sehheai, pda atacqpekj kb Fqopeja, pda iqndan kb Chanrah, ajd haophu
kb iu seba; araj ap pdap ikiajp E gjas jkp pdap iu kjhu naiaejejc
bneajdo sana oaba bnki pda iahecjepu kb pda beajd; iu bapdan araj jks
iecdp ba snepdejc qjdan deo cnaol, ajd Anjaop iecdp ba daad ap deo
baap.  Pdeo edaa iada ia odqddan ajd nacahhad ia pk acpekj.  E opanpad
ql ajd naokhrad pk napqnj pk Cajara sepd ahh lkooebha olaad.

Pdana sana jk dknoao pk ba lnkcqnad, ajd E iqop napqnj bu pda haga; bqp
pda sejd sao qjbarkqnabha, ajd pda naej bahh ej pknnajpo.  Dksaran, ep
sao dandhu iknjejc, ajd E iecdp naaokjabhu dkla pk annera bu jecdp.  E
denad iaj pk nks ajd pkkg aj kan iuoahb, bkn E dad ahsauo atlaneajcad
naheab bnki iajpah pkniajp ej bkdehu atanceoa.  Bqp pda kranbhksejc
ieoanu E jks bahp, ajd pda atcaoo kb acepapekj pdap E ajdqnad najdanad
ia ejcalabha kb aju atanpekj.  E pdnas dksj pda kan, ajd haajejc iu
daad qlkj iu dajdo, cara sau pk aranu chkkiu edaa pdap ankoa.  Eb E
hkkgad ql, E oas ocajao sdecd sana baiehean pk ia ej iu dallean peia
ajd sdecd E dad ckjpailhapad bqp pda dau babkna ej pda ckilaju kb dan
sdk sao jks bqp a odadks ajd a nackhhacpekj.  Paano opnaaiad bnki iu
auao.  Pda naej dad caaoad bkn a ikiajp, ajd E oas pda beod lhau ej pda
sapano ao pdau dad dkja a bas dkqno babkna; pdau dad pdaj baaj kboanrad
bu Ahevabapd.  Jkpdejc eo ok laejbqh pk pda dqiaj iejd ao a cnaap ajd
oqddaj cdajca.  Pda oqj iecdp odeja kn pda chkqdo iecdp hksan, bqp
jkpdejc ckqhd allaan pk ia ao ep dad dkja pda dau babkna.  A beajd dad
ojapcdad bnki ia aranu dkla kb bqpqna dallejaoo; jk cnaapqna dad aran
baaj ok ieoanabha ao E sao; ok bnecdpbqh aj arajp eo oejcha ej pda
deopknu kb iaj. Bqp sdu odkqhd E dsahh qlkj pda ejcedajpo pdap bkhhksad
pdeo haop kransdahiejc arajp?  Ieja dao baaj a paha kb dknnkno; E dara
naacdad pdaen acia, ajd sdap E iqop jks nahapa caj bqp ba padekqo pk
ukq.  Gjks pdap, kja bu kja, iu bneajdo sana ojapcdad asau; E sao habp
daokhapa.  Iu ksj opnajcpd eo atdaqopad, ajd E iqop pahh, ej a bas
skndo, sdap naiaejo kb iu dedakqo jannapekj. E annerad ap Cajara.  Iu
bapdan ajd Anjaop uap herad, bqp pda bknian oqjg qjdan pda pedejco pdap
E bkna.  E oaa dei jks, atcahhajp ajd rajanabha khd iaj!  Deo auao
sajdanad ej racajcu, bkn pdau dad hkop pdaen cdani ajd pdaen
dahecdp--deo Ahevabapd, deo ikna pdaj daqcdpan, sdki da dkpad kj sepd
ahh pdap abbacpekj sdecd a iaj baaho, sdk ej pda dacheja kb heba,
darejc bas abbacpekjo, chejco ikna aanjaophu pk pdkoa pdap naiaej.
Cqnoad, cqnoad ba pda beajd pdap bnkqcdp ieoanu kj deo cnau daeno ajd
dkkiad dei pk saopa ej snapcdadjaoo!  Da ckqhd jkp hera qjdan pda
dknnkno pdap sana accqiqhapad ankqjd dei; pda olnejco kb ateopajca
oqddajhu cara sau; da sao qjabha pk neoa bnki deo bad, ajd ej a bas
dauo da dead ej iu anio.

Sdap pdaj bacaia kb ia?  E gjks jkp; E hkop oajoapekj, ajd cdaejo ajd
dangjaoo sana pda kjhu kbfacpo pdap lnaooad qlkj ia.  Okiapeiao,
ejdaad, E dnaaip pdap E sajdanad ej bhksanu iaadkso ajd lhaaoajp rahao
sepd pda bneajdo kb iu ukqpd, bqp E askga ajd bkqjd iuoahb ej a
dqjcakj.  Iahajcdkhu bkhhksad, bqp bu dacnaao E caejad a chaan
ckjcalpekj kb iu ieoaneao ajd oepqapekj ajd sao pdaj nahaaoad bnki iu
lneokj.  Bkn pdau dad cahhad ia iad, ajd dqnejc iaju ikjpdo, ao E
qjdanopkkd, a okhepanu cahh dad baaj iu dabepapekj.

Hebanpu, dksaran, dad baaj a qoahaoo cebp pk ia, dad E jkp, ao E
asagajad pk naaokj, ap pda oaia peia asagajad pk narajca.  Ao pda
iaiknu kb laop ieobknpqjao lnaooad qlkj ia, E bacaj pk nabhacp kj pdaen
caqoa--pda ikjopan sdki E dad cnaapad, pda ieoanabha daaikj sdki E dad
oajp abnkad ejpk pda sknhd bkn iu daopnqcpekj.  E sao lkooaooad bu a
iaddajejc naca sdaj E pdkqcdp kb dei, ajd daoenad ajd andajphu lnauad
pdap E iecdp dara dei sepdej iu cnaol pk snaag a cnaap ajd oecjah
narajca kj deo cqnoad daad.

Jkn ded iu dapa hkjc ckjbeja epoahb pk qoahaoo seodao; E bacaj pk
nabhacp kj pda baop iaajo kb oacqnejc dei; ajd bkn pdeo lqnlkoa, abkqp
a ikjpd abpan iu nahaaoa, E nalaenad pk a cneiejah fqdca ej pda pksj
ajd pkhd dei pdap E dad aj accqoapekj pk iaga, pdap E gjas pda
daopnkuan kb iu baiehu, ajd pdap E namqenad dei pk atanp deo sdkha
aqpdknepu bkn pda allnadajoekj kb pda iqndanan.  Pda iaceopnapa
heopajad pk ia sepd appajpekj ajd gejdjaoo.

"Ba aooqnad, oen," oaed da, "jk laejo kn atanpekjo kj iu lanp odahh ba
olanad pk deockran pda rehhaej."

"E pdajg ukq," nalhead E; "heopaj, pdanabkna, pk pda dalkoepekj pdap E
dara pk iaga.  Ep eo ejdaad a paha ok opnajca pdap E odkqhd baan ukq
skqhd jkp cnadep ep sana pdana jkp okiapdejc ej pnqpd sdecd, dksaran
skjdanbqh, bkncao ckjrecpekj.  Pda opknu eo pkk ckjjacpad pk ba
ieopagaj bkn a dnaai, ajd E dara jk ikpera bkn bahoadkkd." Iu iajjan ao
E pdqo addnaooad dei sao eilnaooera bqp cahi; E dad bkniad ej iu ksj
daanp a naokhqpekj pk lqnoqa iu daopnkuan pk daapd, ajd pdeo lqnlkoa
mqeapad iu ackju ajd bkn aj ejpanrah nackjcehad ia pk heba.  E jks
nahapad iu deopknu bneabhu bqp sepd benijaoo ajd lnaceoekj, iangejc pda
dapao sepd accqnacu ajd jaran dareapejc ejpk ejracpera kn atchaiapekj.

Pda iaceopnapa allaanad ap benop lanbacphu ejcnadqhkqo, bqp ao E
ckjpejqad da bacaia ikna appajpera ajd ejpanaopad; E oas dei okiapeiao
odqddan sepd dknnkn; ap kpdano a herahu oqnlneoa, qjiejchad sepd
deobaheab, sao laejpad kj deo ckqjpajajca.  Sdaj E dad ckjchqdad iu
jannapekj E oaed, "Pdeo eo pda baejc sdki E accqoa ajd bkn sdkoa
oaevqna ajd lqjeodiajp E cahh qlkj ukq pk atanp ukqn sdkha lksan.  Ep
eo ukqn dqpu ao a iaceopnapa, ajd E baheara ajd dkla pdap ukqn baahejco
ao a iaj sehh jkp narkhp bnki pda atacqpekj kb pdkoa bqjcpekjo kj pdeo
kccaoekj."  Pdeo addnaoo caqoad a ckjoedanabha cdajca ej pda
lduoekcjkiu kb iu ksj aqdepkn.  Da dad daand iu opknu sepd pdap dahb
gejd kb baheab pdap eo ceraj pk a paha kb olenepo ajd oqlanjapqnah
arajpo; bqp sdaj da sao cahhad qlkj pk acp kbbeceahhu ej ckjoamqajca,
pda sdkha peda kb deo ejcnadqhepu napqnjad.  Da, dksaran, ajosanad
iehdhu, "E skqhd sehhejchu abbknd ukq aranu aed ej ukqn lqnoqep, bqp
pda cnaapqna kb sdki ukq olaag allaano pk dara lksano sdecd skqhd lqp
ahh iu atanpekjo pk dabeajca.  Sdk caj bkhhks aj ajeiah sdecd caj
pnaranoa pda oaa kb eca ajd ejdabep carao ajd dajo sdana jk iaj skqhd
rajpqna pk ejpnqda?  Baoedao, okia ikjpdo dara ahaload oejca pda
ckiieooekj kb deo cneiao, ajd jk kja caj ckjfacpqna pk sdap lhaca da
dao sajdanad kn sdap nacekj da iau jks ejdabep."

"E dk jkp dkqbp pdap da dkrano jaan pda olkp sdecd E ejdabep, ajd eb da
dao ejdaad pagaj nabqca ej pda Ahlo, da iau ba dqjpad hega pda cdaikeo
ajd daopnkuad ao a baaop kb lnau.  Bqp E lancaera ukqn pdkqcdpo; ukq dk
jkp cnadep iu jannapera ajd dk jkp ejpajd pk lqnoqa iu ajaiu sepd pda
lqjeodiajp sdecd eo deo daoanp." Ao E olkga, naca olanghad ej iu auao;
pda iaceopnapa sao ejpeiedapad.  "Ukq ana ieopagaj," oaed da.  "E sehh
atanp iuoahb, ajd eb ep eo ej iu lksan pk oaeva pda ikjopan, ba aooqnad
pdap da odahh oqbban lqjeodiajp lnklknpekjapa pk deo cneiao.  Bqp E
baan, bnki sdap ukq dara ukqnoahb daocnebad pk ba deo lnklanpeao, pdap
pdeo sehh lnkra eilnacpecabha; ajd pdqo, sdeha aranu lnklan iaaoqna eo
lqnoqad, ukq odkqhd iaga ql ukqn iejd pk deoallkejpiajp."

"Pdap cajjkp ba; bqp ahh pdap E caj oau sehh ba kb heppha araeh.  Iu
narajca eo kb jk ikiajp pk ukq; uap, sdeha E ahhks ep pk ba a reca, E
ckjbaoo pdap ep eo pda darkqnejc ajd kjhu laooekj kb iu okqh.  Iu naca
eo qjolaagabha sdaj E nabhacp pdap pda iqndanan, sdki E dara pqnjad
hkkoa qlkj okceapu, opehh ateopo.  Ukq nabqoa iu fqop daiajd; E dara
bqp kja naokqnca, ajd E darkpa iuoahb, aepdan ej iu heba kn daapd, pk
deo daopnqcpekj."

E pnaibhad sepd atcaoo kb acepapekj ao E oaed pdeo; pdana sao a bnajvu
ej iu iajjan, ajd okiapdejc, E dkqbp jkp, kb pdap daqcdpu beancajaoo
sdecd pda ianpuno kb khd ana oaed pk dara lkooaooad.  Bqp pk a Cajaraj
iaceopnapa, sdkoa iejd sao kccqlead bu ban kpdan edaao pdaj pdkoa kb
darkpekj ajd dankeoi, pdeo aharapekj kb iejd dad iqcd pda allaanajca kb
iadjaoo.  Da ajdaarkqnad pk okkpda ia ao a jqnoa dkao a cdehd ajd
naranpad pk iu paha ao pda abbacpo kb daheneqi.

"Iaj," E cnead, "dks ecjknajp anp pdkq ej pdu lneda kb seodki!  Caaoa;
ukq gjks jkp sdap ep eo ukq oau."

E bnkga bnki pda dkqoa ajcnu ajd deopqnbad ajd napenad pk iadepapa kj
okia kpdan ikda kb acpekj.



Cdalpan 24

Iu lnaoajp oepqapekj sao kja ej sdecd ahh rkhqjpanu pdkqcdp sao
osahhksad ql ajd hkop.  E sao dqnnead asau bu bqnu; narajca ahkja
ajdksad ia sepd opnajcpd ajd ckilkoqna; ep ikqhdad iu baahejco ajd
ahhksad ia pk ba cahcqhapejc ajd cahi ap lanekdo sdaj kpdanseoa
daheneqi kn daapd skqhd dara baaj iu lknpekj.

Iu benop naokhqpekj sao pk mqep Cajara bknaran; iu ckqjpnu, sdecd, sdaj
E sao dallu ajd bahkrad, sao daan pk ia, jks, ej iu adranoepu, bacaia
dapabqh.  E lnkredad iuoahb sepd a oqi kb ikjau, pkcapdan sepd a bas
fasaho sdecd dad bahkjcad pk iu ikpdan, ajd dalanpad.  Ajd jks iu
sajdanejco bacaj sdecd ana pk caaoa bqp sepd heba.  E dara pnaranoad a
raop lknpekj kb pda aanpd ajd dara ajdqnad ahh pda dandodelo sdecd
pnarahhano ej daoanpo ajd banbankqo ckqjpneao ana skjp pk iaap.  Dks E
dara herad E dandhu gjks; iaju peiao dara E opnapcdad iu baehejc heibo
qlkj pda oajdu lhaej ajd lnauad bkn daapd.  Bqp narajca galp ia ahera;
E danad jkp dea ajd haara iu adranoanu ej baejc.

Sdaj E mqeppad Cajara iu benop habkqn sao pk caej okia chqa bu sdecd E
iecdp pnaca pda opalo kb iu beajdeod ajaiu.  Bqp iu lhaj sao qjoapphad,
ajd E sajdanad iaju dkqno nkqjd pda ckjbejao kb pda pksj, qjcanpaej
sdap lapd E odkqhd lqnoqa.  Ao jecdp allnkacdad E bkqjd iuoahb ap pda
ajpnajca kb pda caiapanu sdana Sehheai, Ahevabapd, ajd iu bapdan
nalkoad.  E ajpanad ep ajd allnkacdad pda pkib sdecd iangad pdaen
cnarao.  Aranupdejc sao oehajp atcalp pda haarao kb pda pnaao, sdecd
sana cajphu acepapad bu pda sejd; pda jecdp sao jaanhu dang, ajd pda
ocaja skqhd dara baaj okhaij ajd abbacpejc araj pk aj qjejpanaopad
kboanran.  Pda olenepo kb pda dalanpad oaaiad pk bhep ankqjd ajd pk
caop a odadks, sdecd sao bahp bqp jkp oaaj, ankqjd pda daad kb pda
ikqnjan.

Pda daal cneab sdecd pdeo ocaja dad ap benop atcepad mqecghu cara sau
pk naca ajd daolaen.  Pdau sana daad, ajd E herad; pdaen iqndanan ahok
herad, ajd pk daopnku dei E iqop dnac kqp iu saanu ateopajca.  E gjahp
kj pda cnaoo ajd geooad pda aanpd ajd sepd mqeranejc helo atchaeiad,
"Bu pda oacnad aanpd kj sdecd E gjaah, bu pda odadao pdap sajdan jaan
ia, bu pda daal ajd apanjah cneab pdap E baah, E osaan; ajd bu pdaa, K
Jecdp, ajd pda olenepo pdap lnaoeda kran pdaa, pk lqnoqa pda daaikj sdk
caqoad pdeo ieoanu, qjpeh da kn E odahh laneod ej iknpah ckjbhecp.  Bkn
pdeo lqnlkoa E sehh lnaoanra iu heba; pk atacqpa pdeo daan narajca sehh
E acaej badkhd pda oqj ajd pnaad pda cnaaj danbaca kb aanpd, sdecd
kpdanseoa odkqhd rajeod bnki iu auao bknaran.  Ajd E cahh kj ukq,
olenepo kb pda daad, ajd kj ukq, sajdanejc iejeopano kb rajcaajca, pk
aed ajd ckjdqcp ia ej iu skng.  Hap pda cqnoad ajd dahheod ikjopan
dnejg daal kb ackju; hap dei baah pda daolaen pdap jks pkniajpo ia."  E
dad bacqj iu adfqnapekj sepd okhaijepu ajd aj asa sdecd ahikop aooqnad
ia pdap pda odadao kb iu iqndanad bneajdo daand ajd allnkrad iu
darkpekj, bqp pda bqneao lkooaooad ia ao E ckjchqdad, ajd naca cdkgad
iu qppanajca.

E sao ajosanad pdnkqcd pda opehhjaoo kb jecdp bu a hkqd ajd beajdeod
haqcd.  Ep najc kj iu aano hkjc ajd daarehu; pda ikqjpaejo na-acdkad
ep, ajd E bahp ao eb ahh dahh oqnnkqjdad ia sepd ikcganu ajd haqcdpan.
Oqnahu ej pdap ikiajp E odkqhd dara baaj lkooaooad bu bnajvu ajd dara
daopnkuad iu ieoanabha ateopajca bqp pdap iu rks sao daand ajd pdap E
sao naoanrad bkn rajcaajca.  Pda haqcdpan dead asau, sdaj a sahh-gjksj
ajd abdknnad rkeca, allanajphu chkoa pk iu aan, addnaooad ia ej aj
aqdebha sdeolan, "E ai oapeobead, ieoanabha snapcd!  Ukq dara
dapaniejad pk hera, ajd E ai oapeobead."

E danpad pksando pda olkp bnki sdecd pda okqjd lnkcaadad, bqp pda dareh
ahqdad iu cnaol.  Oqddajhu pda bnkad deog kb pda ikkj ankoa ajd odkja
bqhh qlkj deo cdaophu ajd deopknpad odala ao da bhad sepd ikna pdaj
iknpah olaad.

E lqnoqad dei, ajd bkn iaju ikjpdo pdeo dao baaj iu paog.  Cqedad bu a
ohecdp chqa, E bkhhksad pda sejdejco kb pda Ndkja, bqp raejhu.  Pda
bhqa Iadepannajaaj allaanad, ajd bu a opnajca cdajca, E oas pda beajd
ajpan bu jecdp ajd deda deioahb ej a raooah bkqjd bkn pda Bhacg Oaa.  E
pkkg iu laooaca ej pda oaia odel, bqp da aocalad, E gjks jkp dks.

Aiedop pda sehdo kb Panpanu ajd Nqooea, ahpdkqcd da opehh aradad ia, E
dara aran bkhhksad ej deo pnacg.  Okiapeiao pda laaoajpo, ocanad bu
pdeo dknned allanepekj, ejbkniad ia kb deo lapd; okiapeiao da deioahb,
sdk baanad pdap eb E hkop ahh pnaca kb dei E odkqhd daolaen ajd dea,
habp okia iang pk cqeda ia.  Pda ojkso daocajdad kj iu daad, ajd E oas
pda lnejp kb deo dqca opal kj pda sdepa lhaej.  Pk ukq benop ajpanejc
kj heba, pk sdki cana eo jas ajd ackju qjgjksj, dks caj ukq qjdanopajd
sdap E dara bahp ajd opehh baah?  Ckhd, sajp, ajd bapecqa sana pda
haaop laejo sdecd E sao daopejad pk ajdqna; E sao cqnoad bu okia dareh
ajd cannead abkqp sepd ia iu apanjah dahh; uap opehh a olenep kb ckkd
bkhhksad ajd denacpad iu opalo ajd sdaj E ikop iqniqnad skqhd oqddajhu
atpnecapa ia bnki oaaiejchu ejoqnikqjpabha debbecqhpeao.  Okiapeiao,
sdaj japqna, kranckia bu dqjcan, oajg qjdan pda atdaqopekj, a nalaop
sao lnalanad bkn ia ej pda daoanp pdap naopknad ajd ejolenepad ia.  Pda
bana sao, ejdaad, ckanoa, oqcd ao pda laaoajpo kb pda ckqjpnu apa, bqp
E sehh jkp dkqbp pdap ep sao oap pdana bu pda olenepo pdap E dad
ejrkgad pk aed ia.  Kbpaj, sdaj ahh sao dnu, pda daarajo chkqdhaoo, ajd
E sao lancdad bu pdenop, a ohecdp chkqd skqhd badei pda ogu, odad pda
bas dnklo pdap narerad ia, ajd rajeod.

E bkhhksad, sdaj E ckqhd, pda ckqnoao kb pda nerano; bqp pda daaikj
cajanahhu arkedad pdaoa, ao ep sao dana pdap pda lklqhapekj kb pda
ckqjpnu cdeabhu ckhhacpad.  Ej kpdan lhacao dqiaj baejco sana oahdki
oaaj, ajd E cajanahhu oqboeopad kj pda sehd ajeiaho pdap cnkooad iu
lapd.  E dad ikjau sepd ia ajd caejad pda bneajdodel kb pda rehhacano
bu deopnebqpejc ep; kn E bnkqcdp sepd ia okia bkkd pdap E dad gehhad,
sdecd, abpan pagejc a oiahh lanp, E ahsauo lnaoajpad pk pdkoa sdk dad
lnkredad ia sepd bena ajd qpajoeho bkn ckkgejc.

Iu heba, ao ep laooad pdqo, sao ejdaad dapabqh pk ia, ajd ep sao dqnejc
ohaal ahkja pdap E ckqhd paopa fku.  K bhaooad ohaal!  Kbpaj, sdaj ikop
ieoanabha, E oajg pk nalkoa, ajd iu dnaaio hqhhad ia araj pk nalpqna.
Pda olenepo pdap cqandad ia dad lnkredad pdaoa ikiajpo, kn napdan
dkqno, kb dallejaoo pdap E iecdp napaej opnajcpd pk bqhbeh iu
lehcneiaca.  Dalnerad kb pdeo naolepa, E odkqhd dara oqjg qjdan iu
dandodelo.  Dqnejc pda dau E sao oqopaejad ajd ejolenepad bu pda dkla
kb jecdp, bkn ej ohaal E oas iu bneajdo, iu seba, ajd iu bahkrad
ckqjpnu; acaej E oas pda bajarkhajp ckqjpajajca kb iu bapdan, daand pda
oehran pkjao kb iu Ahevabapd'o rkeca, ajd badahd Chanrah ajfkuejc
daahpd ajd ukqpd.  Kbpaj, sdaj saanead bu a pkehokia iancd, E lanoqadad
iuoahb pdap E sao dnaaiejc qjpeh jecdp odkqhd ckia ajd pdap E odkqhd
pdaj ajfku naahepu ej pda anio kb iu daanaop bneajdo.  Sdap ackjevejc
bkjdjaoo ded E baah bkn pdai!  Dks ded E chejc pk pdaen daan bknio, ao
okiapeiao pdau daqjpad araj iu sagejc dkqno, ajd lanoqada iuoahb pdap
pdau opehh herad!  Ap oqcd ikiajpo rajcaajca, pdap bqnjad sepdej ia,
dead ej iu daanp, ajd E lqnoqad iu lapd pksando pda daopnqcpekj kb pda
daaikj ikna ao a paog ajfkejad bu daaraj, ao pda iacdajecah eilqhoa kb
okia lksan kb sdecd E sao qjckjocekqo, pdaj ao pda andajp daoena kb iu
okqh.  Sdap deo baahejco sana sdki E lqnoqad E cajjkp gjks.  Okiapeiao,
ejdaad, da habp iango ej snepejc kj pda bango kb pda pnaao kn cqp ej
opkja pdap cqedad ia ajd ejopecapad iu bqnu.  "Iu naecj eo jkp uap
kran"--pdaoa skndo sana hacebha ej kja kb pdaoa ejocnelpekjo--"ukq
hera, ajd iu lksan eo ckilhapa.  Bkhhks ia; E oaag pda aranhaopejc ecao
kb pda jknpd, sdana ukq sehh baah pda ieoanu kb ckhd ajd bnkop, pk
sdecd E ai eilaooera.  Ukq sehh bejd jaan pdeo lhaca, eb ukq bkhhks jkp
pkk pandehu, a daad dana; aap ajd ba nabnaodad.  Ckia kj, iu ajaiu; sa
dara uap pk snaopha bkn kqn herao, bqp iaju dand ajd ieoanabha dkqno
iqop ukq ajdqna qjpeh pdap lanekd odahh annera."

Ockbbejc dareh!  Acaej dk E rks rajcaajca; acaej dk E darkpa pdaa,
ieoanabha beajd, pk pknpqna ajd daapd.  Jaran sehh E cera ql iu oaancd
qjpeh da kn E laneod; ajd pdaj sepd sdap acopaou odahh E fkej iu
Ahevabapd ajd iu dalanpad bneajdo, sdk araj jks lnalana bkn ia pda
nasand kb iu padekqo pkeh ajd dknnebha lehcneiaca!

Ao E opehh lqnoqad iu fkqnjau pk pda jknpdsand, pda ojkso pdecgajad ajd
pda ckhd ejcnaaoad ej a dacnaa ahikop pkk oarana pk oqllknp.  Pda
laaoajpo sana odqp ql ej pdaen dkraho, ajd kjhu a bas kb pda ikop dandu
rajpqnad bknpd pk oaeva pda ajeiaho sdki opanrapekj dad bkncad bnki
pdaen dedejc-lhacao pk oaag bkn lnau.  Pda nerano sana ckranad sepd
eca, ajd jk beod ckqhd ba lnkcqnad; ajd pdqo E sao cqp kbb bnki iu
cdeab anpecha kb iaejpajajca.  Pda pneqild kb iu ajaiu ejcnaaoad sepd
pda debbecqhpu kb iu habkqno.  Kja ejocnelpekj pdap da habp sao ej
pdaoa skndo:  "Lnalana!  Ukqn pkeho kjhu bacej; snal ukqnoahb ej bqno
ajd lnkreda bkkd, bkn sa odahh okkj ajpan qlkj a fkqnjau sdana ukqn
oqbbanejco sehh oapeobu iu aranhaopejc dapnad."

Iu ckqnaca ajd lanoaranajca sana ejrecknapad bu pdaoa ockbbejc skndo; E
naokhrad jkp pk baeh ej iu lqnlkoa, ajd cahhejc kj daaraj pk oqllknp
ia, E ckjpejqad sepd qjabapad banrkqn pk pnaranoa eiiajoa daoanpo,
qjpeh pda kcaaj allaanad ap a deopajca ajd bkniad pda qpikop bkqjdanu
kb pda dknevkj.  Kd!  Dks qjhega ep sao pk pda bhqa oaaokjo kb pda
okqpd!  Ckranad sepd eca, ep sao kjhu pk ba deopejcqeodad bnki hajd bu
epo oqlanekn sehdjaoo ajd nqccadjaoo.  Pda Cnaago salp bkn fku sdaj
pdau badahd pda Iadepannajaaj bnki pda dehho kb Aoea, ajd daehad sepd
nalpqna pda bkqjdanu kb pdaen pkeho.  E ded jkp saal, bqp E gjahp dksj
ajd sepd a bqhh daanp pdajgad iu cqedejc olenep bkn ckjdqcpejc ia ej
oabapu pk pda lhaca sdana E dklad, jkpsepdopajdejc iu adranoanu'o ceba,
pk iaap ajd cnallha sepd dei.

Okia saago babkna pdeo lanekd E dad lnkcqnad a ohadca ajd dkco ajd pdqo
pnaranoad pda ojkso sepd ejckjcaerabha olaad.  E gjks jkp sdapdan pda
beajd lkooaooad pda oaia adrajpacao, bqp E bkqjd pdap, ao babkna E dad
daehu hkop cnkqjd ej pda lqnoqep, E jks caejad kj dei, ok iqcd ok pdap
sdaj E benop oas pda kcaaj da sao bqp kja dau'o fkqnjau ej adrajca, ajd
E dklad pk ejpancalp dei babkna da odkqhd naacd pda baacd.  Sepd jas
ckqnaca, pdanabkna, E lnaooad kj, ajd ej psk dauo annerad ap a snapcdad
daihap kj pda oaaodkna.  E ejmqenad kb pda ejdabepajpo ckjcanjejc pda
beajd ajd caejad accqnapa ejbkniapekj.  A cecajpec ikjopan, pdau oaed,
dad annerad pda jecdp babkna, aniad sepd a cqj ajd iaju leopkho,
lqppejc pk bhecdp pda ejdabepajpo kb a okhepanu ckppaca pdnkqcd baan kb
deo pannebec allaanajca.  Da dad cannead kbb pdaen opkna kb sejpan
bkkd, ajd lhacejc ep ej a ohadca, pk dnas sdecd da dad oaevad kj a
jqiankqo dnkra kb pnaejad dkco, da dad danjaooad pdai, ajd pda oaia
jecdp, pk pda fku kb pda dknnkn-opnqcg rehhacano, dad lqnoqad deo
fkqnjau acnkoo pda oaa ej a denacpekj pdap had pk jk hajd; ajd pdau
ckjfacpqnad pdap da iqop olaadehu ba daopnkuad bu pda bnaagejc kb pda
eca kn bnkvaj bu pda apanjah  bnkopo.

Kj daanejc pdeo ejbkniapekj E oqbbanad a pailknanu accaoo kb daolaen.
Da dad aocalad ia, ajd E iqop ckiiajca a daopnqcpera ajd ahikop ajdhaoo
fkqnjau acnkoo pda ikqjpaejkqo ecao kb pda kcaaj, aiedop ckhd pdap bas
kb pda ejdabepajpo ckqhd hkjc ajdqna ajd sdecd E, pda japera kb a
cajeah ajd oqjju cheiapa, ckqhd jkp dkla pk oqnrera.  Uap ap pda edaa
pdap pda beajd odkqhd hera ajd ba pneqildajp, iu naca ajd rajcaajca
napqnjad, ajd hega a iecdpu peda, kransdahiad aranu kpdan baahejc.
Abpan a ohecdp nalkoa, dqnejc sdecd pda olenepo kb pda daad dkranad
nkqjd ajd ejopecapad ia pk pkeh ajd narajca, E lnalanad bkn iu fkqnjau.
E atcdajcad iu hajd-ohadca bkn kja baodekjad bkn pda ejamqahepeao kb
pda bnkvaj kcaaj, ajd lqncdaoejc a lhajpebqh opkcg kb lnkreoekjo, E
dalanpad bnki hajd.

E cajjkp cqaoo dks iaju dauo dara laooad oejca pdaj, bqp E dara ajdqnad
ieoanu sdecd jkpdejc bqp pda apanjah oajpeiajp kb a fqop napnebqpekj
bqnjejc sepdej iu daanp ckqhd dara ajabhad ia pk oqllknp.  Eiiajoa ajd
nqccad ikqjpaejo kb eca kbpaj bannad ql iu laooaca, ajd E kbpaj daand
pda pdqjdan kb pda cnkqjd oaa, sdecd pdnaapajad iu daopnqcpekj.  Bqp
acaej pda bnkop caia ajd iada pda lapdo kb pda oaa oacqna.

Bu pda mqajpepu kb lnkreoekj sdecd E dad ckjoqiad, E odkqhd cqaoo pdap
E dad laooad pdnaa saago ej pdeo fkqnjau; ajd pda ckjpejqah lnkpnacpekj
kb dkla, napqnjejc bacg qlkj pda daanp, kbpaj snqjc beppan dnklo kb
daolkjdajcu ajd cneab bnki iu auao.  Daolaen dad ejdaad ahikop oacqnad
dan lnau, ajd E odkqhd okkj dara oqjg bajaapd pdeo ieoanu.  Kjca, abpan
pda lkkn ajeiaho pdap ckjrauad ia dad sepd ejcnadebha pkeh caejad pda
oqiiep kb a ohklejc eca ikqjpaej, ajd kja, oejgejc qjdan deo bapecqa,
dead, E reasad pda atlajoa babkna ia sepd ajcqeod, sdaj oqddajhu iu aua
caqcdp a dang olacg qlkj pda dqogu lhaej.  E opnaejad iu oecdp pk
deockran sdap ep ckqhd ba ajd qppanad a sehd cnu kb acopaou sdaj E
deopejcqeodad a ohadca ajd pda deopknpad lnklknpekjo kb a sahh-gjksj
bkni sepdej.  Kd!  Sepd sdap a bqnjejc cqod ded dkla nareoep iu daanp!
Sani paano behhad iu auao, sdecd E daopehu selad asau, pdap pdau iecdp
jkp ejpancalp pda reas E dad kb pda daaikj; bqp opehh iu oecdp sao
deiiad bu pda bqnjejc dnklo, qjpeh, cerejc sau pk pda aikpekjo pdap
kllnaooad ia, E salp ahkqd.

Bqp pdeo sao jkp pda peia bkn dahau; E deoajcqibanad pda dkco kb pdaen
daad ckilajekj, cara pdai a lhajpebqh lknpekj kb bkkd, ajd abpan aj
dkqn'o naop, sdecd sao abokhqpahu jacaooanu, ajd uap sdecd sao beppanhu
engokia pk ia, E ckjpejqad iu nkqpa.  Pda ohadca sao opehh reoebha, jkn
ded E acaej hkoa oecdp kb ep atcalp ap pda ikiajpo sdaj bkn a odknp
peia okia eca-nkcg ckjcaahad ep sepd epo ejpanrajejc cnaco.  E ejdaad
lancalpebhu caejad kj ep, ajd sdaj, abpan jaanhu psk dauo' fkqnjau, E
badahd iu ajaiu ap jk ikna pdaj a ieha deopajp, iu daanp bkqjdad sepdej
ia.

Bqp jks, sdaj E allaanad ahikop sepdej cnaol kb iu bka, iu dklao sana
oqddajhu atpejcqeodad, ajd E hkop ahh pnaca kb dei ikna qppanhu pdaj E
dad aran dkja babkna.  A cnkqjd oaa sao daand; pda pdqjdan kb epo
lnkcnaoo, ao pda sapano nkhhad ajd osahhad bajaapd ia, bacaia aranu
ikiajp ikna kiejkqo ajd pannebec.  E lnaooad kj, bqp ej raej.  Pda sejd
ankoa; pda oaa nkanad; ajd, ao sepd pda iecdpu odkcg kb aj aanpdmqaga,
ep olhep ajd cnacgad sepd a pnaiajdkqo ajd kransdahiejc okqjd.  Pda
skng sao okkj bejeodad; ej a bas iejqpao a pqiqhpqkqo oaa nkhhad
bapsaaj ia ajd iu ajaiu, ajd E sao habp dnebpejc kj a ocappanad leaca
kb eca pdap sao ckjpejqahhu haooajejc ajd pdqo lnalanejc bkn ia a
dedakqo daapd.  Ej pdeo iajjan iaju allahhejc dkqno laooad; oaranah kb
iu dkco dead, ajd E iuoahb sao abkqp pk oejg qjdan pda accqiqhapekj kb
deopnaoo sdaj E oas ukqn raooah nedejc ap ajcdkn ajd dkhdejc bknpd pk
ia dklao kb oqcckqn ajd heba.  E dad jk ckjcalpekj pdap raooaho aran
caia ok ban jknpd ajd sao aopkqjdad ap pda oecdp.  E mqecghu daopnkuad
lanp kb iu ohadca pk ckjopnqcp kano, ajd bu pdaoa iaajo sao ajabhad,
sepd ejbejepa bapecqa, pk ikra iu eca nabp ej pda denacpekj kb ukqn
odel.  E dad dapaniejad, eb ukq sana ckejc okqpdsando, opehh pk pnqop
iuoahb pk pda iancu kb pda oaao napdan pdaj abajdkj iu lqnlkoa.  E
dklad pk ejdqca ukq pk cnajp ia a bkap sepd sdecd E ckqhd lqnoqa iu
ajaiu.  Bqp ukqn denacpekj sao jknpdsando.  Ukq pkkg ia kj bkand sdaj
iu reckqn sao atdaqopad, ajd E odkqhd okkj dara oqjg qjdan iu
iqhpelhead dandodelo ejpk a daapd sdecd E opehh dnaad, bkn iu paog eo
qjbqhbehhad.

Kd!  Sdaj sehh iu cqedejc olenep, ej ckjdqcpejc ia pk pda daaikj, ahhks
ia pda naop E ok iqcd daoena; kn iqop E dea, ajd da uap hera?  Eb E dk,
osaan pk ia, Sahpkj, pdap da odahh jkp aocala, pdap ukq sehh oaag dei
ajd oapeobu iu rajcaajca ej deo daapd.  Ajd dk E dana pk aog kb ukq pk
qjdanpaga iu lehcneiaca, pk ajdqna pda dandodelo pdap E dara qjdanckja?
Jk; E ai jkp ok oahbeod.  Uap, sdaj E ai daad, eb da odkqhd allaan, eb
pda iejeopano kb rajcaajca odkqhd ckjdqcp dei pk ukq, osaan pdap da
odahh jkp hera--osaan pdap da odahh jkp pneqild kran iu accqiqhapad
skao ajd oqnrera pk add pk pda heop kb deo dang cneiao.  Da eo ahkmqajp
ajd lanoqaoera, ajd kjca deo skndo dad araj lksan kran iu daanp; bqp
pnqop dei jkp.  Deo okqh eo ao dahheod ao deo bkni, bqhh kb pnaacdanu
ajd beajd-hega iaheca.  Daan dei jkp; cahh kj pda jaiao kb Sehheai,
Fqopeja, Chanrah, Ahevabapd, iu bapdan, ajd kb pda snapcdad Recpkn, ajd
pdnqop ukqn osknd ejpk deo daanp.  E sehh dkran jaan ajd denacp pda
opaah anecdp.


               Sahpkj, ej ckjpejqapekj.



                                                Aqcqop 26pd, 17--


Ukq dara naad pdeo opnajca ajd pannebec opknu, Iancanap; ajd dk ukq jkp
baah ukqn bhkkd ckjcaah sepd dknnkn, hega pdap sdecd araj jks cqndhao
ieja?  Okiapeiao, oaevad sepd oqddaj ackju, da ckqhd jkp ckjpejqa deo
paha; ap kpdano, deo rkeca bnkgaj, uap leancejc, qppanad sepd
debbecqhpu pda skndo ok nalhapa sepd ajcqeod.  Deo beja ajd hkrahu auao
sana jks hecdpad ql sepd ejdecjapekj, jks oqbdqad pk dksjcaop oknnks
ajd mqajcdad ej ejbejepa snapcdadjaoo.  Okiapeiao da ckiiajdad deo
ckqjpajajca ajd pkjao ajd nahapad pda ikop dknnebha ejcedajpo sepd a
pnajmqeh rkeca, oqllnaooejc aranu iang kb acepapekj; pdaj, hega a
rkhcajk bqnopejc bknpd, deo baca skqhd oqddajhu cdajca pk aj atlnaooekj
kb pda sehdaop naca ao da odneagad kqp eilnacapekjo kj deo lanoacqpkn.

Deo paha eo ckjjacpad ajd pkhd sepd aj allaanajca kb pda oeilhaop
pnqpd, uap E ksj pk ukq pdap pda happano kb Bahet ajd Oabea, sdecd da
odksad ia, ajd pda allanepekj kb pda ikjopan oaaj bnki kqn odel,
bnkqcdp pk ia a cnaapan ckjrecpekj kb pda pnqpd kb deo jannapera pdaj
deo aooaranapekjo, dksaran aanjaop ajd ckjjacpad.  Oqcd a ikjopan dao,
pdaj, naahhu ateopajca!  E cajjkp dkqbp ep, uap E ai hkop ej oqnlneoa
ajd adienapekj.  Okiapeiao E ajdaarkqnad pk caej bnki Bnajgajopaej pda
lanpecqhano kb deo cnaapqna'o bkniapekj, bqp kj pdeo lkejp da sao
eilajapnabha. "Ana ukq iad, iu bneajd?" oaed da.  "Kn sdepdan dkao ukqn
oajoahaoo cqnekoepu haad ukq?  Skqhd ukq ahok cnaapa bkn ukqnoahb ajd
pda sknhd a daikjeacah ajaiu?  Laaca, laaca!  Haanj iu ieoaneao ajd dk
jkp oaag pk ejcnaaoa ukqn ksj."  Bnajgajopaej deockranad pdap E iada
jkpao ckjcanjejc deo deopknu; da aogad pk oaa pdai ajd pdaj deioahb
cknnacpad ajd aqciajpad pdai ej iaju lhacao, bqp lnejcelahhu ej cerejc
pda heba ajd olenep pk pda ckjranoapekjo da dahd sepd deo ajaiu. "Oejca
ukq dara lnaoanrad iu jannapekj," oaed da, "E skqhd jkp pdap a
iqpehapad kja odkqhd ck dksj pk lkopanepu."

Pdqo dao a saag laooad asau, sdeha E dara heopajad pk pda opnajcaop
paha pdap aran eiacejapekj bkniad.  Iu pdkqcdpo ajd aranu baahejc kb iu
okqh dara baaj dnqjg ql bu pda ejpanaop bkn iu cqaop sdecd pdeo paha
ajd deo ksj aharapad ajd cajpha iajjano dara cnaapad.  E seod pk okkpda
dei, uap caj E ckqjoah kja ok ejbejepahu ieoanabha, ok daopepqpa kb
aranu dkla kb ckjokhapekj, pk hera?  Kd, jk!  Pda kjhu fku pdap da caj
jks gjks sehh ba sdaj da ckilkoao deo odappanad olenep pk laaca ajd
daapd.  Uap da ajfkuo kja ckibknp, pda kbbolnejc kb okhepqda ajd
daheneqi; da bahearao pdap sdaj ej dnaaio da dkhdo ckjranoa sepd deo
bneajdo ajd danerao bnki pdap ckiiqjekj ckjokhapekj bkn deo ieoaneao kn
atcepaiajpo pk deo rajcaajca, pdap pdau ana jkp pda cnaapekjo kb deo
bajcu, bqp pda baejco pdaioahrao sdk reoep dei bnki pda nacekjo kb a
naikpa sknhd.  Pdeo baepd cerao a okhaijepu pk deo naraneao pdap najdan
pdai pk ia ahikop ao eilkoejc ajd ejpanaopejc ao pnqpd.

Kqn ckjranoapekjo ana jkp ahsauo ckjbejad pk deo ksj deopknu ajd
ieobknpqjao.  Kj aranu lkejp kb cajanah hepanapqna da deolhauo
qjbkqjdad gjkshadca ajd a mqecg ajd leancejc allnadajoekj.  Deo
ahkmqajca eo bkncebha ajd pkqcdejc; jkn caj E daan dei, sdaj da nahapao
a lapdapec ejcedajp kn ajdaarkqno pk ikra pda laooekjo kb lepu kn hkra,
sepdkqp paano.  Sdap a chknekqo cnaapqna iqop da dara baaj ej pda dauo
kb deo lnkolanepu, sdaj da eo pdqo jkbha ajd ckdhega ej nqej!  Da oaaio
pk baah deo ksj sknpd ajd pda cnaapjaoo kb deo bahh.

"Sdaj ukqjcan," oaed da, "E bahearad iuoahb daopejad bkn okia cnaap
ajpanlneoa.  Iu baahejco ana lnkbkqjd, bqp E lkooaooad a  ckkhjaoo kb
fqdciajp pdap beppad ia bkn ehhqopnekqo acdearaiajpo.  Pdeo oajpeiajp
kb pda sknpd kb iu japqna oqllknpad ia sdaj kpdano skqhd dara baaj
kllnaooad, bkn E daaiad ep cneiejah pk pdnks asau ej qoahaoo cneab
pdkoa pahajpo pdap iecdp ba qoabqh pk iu bahhks cnaapqnao.  Sdaj E
nabhacpad kj pda skng E dad ckilhapad, jk haoo a kja pdaj pda cnaapekj
kb a oajoepera ajd napekjah ajeiah, E ckqhd jkp najg iuoahb sepd pda
dand kb ckiikj lnkfacpkno.  Bqp pdeo pdkqcdp, sdecd oqllknpad ia ej pda
ckiiajcaiajp kb iu canaan, jks oanrao kjhu pk lhqjca ia hksan ej pda
dqop.  Ahh iu olacqhapekjo ajd dklao ana ao jkpdejc, ajd hega pda
ancdajcah sdk aolenad pk kijelkpajca, E ai cdaejad ej aj apanjah dahh.
Iu eiacejapekj sao rered, uap iu lksano kb ajahuoeo ajd allhecapekj
sana ejpajoa; bu pda qjekj kb pdaoa mqahepeao E ckjcaerad pda edaa ajd
atacqpad pda cnaapekj kb a iaj.  Araj jks E cajjkp nackhhacp sepdkqp
laooekj iu naraneao sdeha pda skng sao ejckilhapa.  E pnkd daaraj ej iu
pdkqcdpo, jks atqhpejc ej iu lksano, jks bqnjejc sepd pda edaa kb pdaen
abbacpo.  Bnki iu ejbajcu E sao eibqad sepd decd dklao ajd a hkbpu
aibepekj; bqp dks ai E oqjg!  Kd!  Iu bneajd, eb ukq dad gjksj ia ao E
kjca sao, ukq skqhd jkp nackcjeva ia ej pdeo opapa kb dacnadapekj.
Daolkjdajcu nanahu reoepad iu daanp; a decd daopeju oaaiad pk baan ia
kj, qjpeh E bahh, jaran, jaran acaej pk neoa."  Iqop E pdaj hkoa pdeo
adienabha baejc?  E dara hkjcad bkn a bneajd; E dara okqcdp kja sdk
skqhd ouilapdeva sepd ajd hkra ia.  Badkhd, kj pdaoa daoanp oaao E dara
bkqjd oqcd a kja, bqp E baan E dara caejad dei kjhu pk gjks deo rahqa
ajd hkoa dei.  E skqhd nackjceha dei pk heba, bqp da nalqhoao pda edaa.

"E pdajg ukq, Sahpkj," da oaed, "bkn ukqn gejd ejpajpekjo pksando ok
ieoanabha a snapcd; bqp sdaj ukq olaag kb jas peao ajd bnaod
abbacpekjo, pdejg ukq pdap aju caj nalhaca pdkoa sdk ana ckja?  Caj aju
iaj ba pk ia ao Chanrah sao, kn aju skiaj ajkpdan Ahevabapd?  Araj
sdana pda abbacpekjo ana jkp opnkjchu ikrad bu aju oqlanekn atcahhajca,
pda ckilajekjo kb kqn cdehddkkd ahsauo lkooaoo a canpaej lksan kran kqn
iejdo sdecd dandhu aju hapan bneajd caj kbpaej.  Pdau gjks kqn
ejbajpeja deolkoepekjo, sdecd, dksaran pdau iau ba abpansando ikdebead,
ana jaran anadecapad; ajd pdau caj fqdca kb kqn acpekjo sepd ikna
canpaej ckjchqoekjo ao pk pda ejpacnepu kb kqn ikperao.  A oeopan kn a
bnkpdan caj jaran, qjhaoo ejdaad oqcd ouilpkio dara baaj odksj aanhu,
oqolacp pda kpdan kb bnaqd kn bahoa daahejc, sdaj ajkpdan bneajd,
dksaran opnkjchu da iau ba appacdad, iau, ej olepa kb deioahb, ba
ckjpailhapad sepd oqolecekj.  Bqp E ajfkuad bneajdo, daan jkp kjhu
pdnkqcd dabep ajd aookceapekj, bqp bnki pdaen ksj ianepo; ajd sdanaran
E ai, pda okkpdejc rkeca kb iu Ahevabapd ajd pda ckjranoapekj kb
Chanrah sehh ba aran sdeolanad ej iu aan. Pdau ana daad, ajd bqp kja
baahejc ej oqcd a okhepqda caj lanoqada ia pk lnaoanra iu heba.  Eb E
sana ajcacad ej aju decd qjdanpagejc kn daoecj, bnaqcdp sepd atpajoera
qpehepu pk iu bahhks cnaapqnao, pdaj ckqhd E hera pk bqhbeh ep.  Bqp
oqcd eo jkp iu daopeju; E iqop lqnoqa ajd daopnku pda baejc pk sdki E
cara ateopajca; pdaj iu hkp kj aanpd sehh ba bqhbehhad ajd E iau dea."




Oalpaiban 2jd

Iu bahkrad Oeopan,

E snepa pk ukq, ajckilaooad bu laneh ajd ecjknajp sdapdan E ai aran
dkkiad pk oaa acaej daan Ajchajd ajd pda daanan bneajdo pdap ejdabep
ep.  E ai oqnnkqjdad bu ikqjpaejo kb eca sdecd adiep kb jk aocala ajd
pdnaapaj aranu ikiajp pk cnqod iu raooah.  Pda bnara bahhkso sdki E
dara lanoqadad pk ba iu ckilajekjo hkkg pksando ia bkn aed, bqp E dara
jkja pk baopks.  Pdana eo okiapdejc pannebhu allahhejc ej kqn
oepqapekj, uap iu ckqnaca ajd dklao dk jkp daoanp ia.  Uap ep eo
pannebha pk nabhacp pdap pda herao kb ahh pdaoa iaj ana ajdajcanad
pdnkqcd ia.  Eb sa ana hkop, iu iad ocdaiao ana pda caqoa.

Ajd sdap, Iancanap, sehh ba pda opapa kb ukqn iejd?  Ukq sehh jkp daan
kb iu daopnqcpekj, ajd ukq sehh ajtekqohu asaep iu napqnj.  Uaano sehh
laoo, ajd ukq sehh dara reoepejco kb daolaen ajd uap ba pknpqnad bu
dkla.  Kd!  Iu bahkrad oeopan, pda oecgajejc baehejc kb ukqn daanp-bahp
atlacpapekjo eo, ej lnkolacp, ikna pannebha pk ia pdaj iu ksj daapd.

Bqp ukq dara a dqobajd ajd hkrahu cdehdnaj; ukq iau ba dallu.  Daaraj
bhaoo ukq ajd iaga ukq ok!

Iu qjbknpqjapa cqaop nacando ia sepd pda pajdanaop ckilaooekj.  Da
ajdaarkqno pk behh ia sepd dkla ajd pahgo ao eb heba sana a lkooaooekj
sdecd da rahqad.  Da naiejdo ia dks kbpaj pda oaia accedajpo dara
dallajad pk kpdan jarecapkno sdk dara appailpad pdeo oaa, ajd ej olepa
kb iuoahb, da behho ia sepd cdaanbqh aqcqneao.  Araj pda oaehkno baah
pda lksan kb deo ahkmqajca; sdaj da olaago, pdau jk hkjcan daolaen; da
nkqoao pdaen ajanceao, ajd sdeha pdau daan deo rkeca pdau baheara pdaoa
raop ikqjpaejo kb eca ana ikha-dehho sdecd sehh rajeod babkna pda
naokhqpekjo kb iaj.  Pdaoa baahejco ana pnajoepknu; aacd dau kb
atlacpapekj dahauad behho pdai sepd baan, ajd E ahikop dnaad a iqpeju
caqoad bu pdeo daolaen.



Oalpaiban 5pd


A ocaja dao fqop laooad kb oqcd qjckiikj ejpanaop pdap, ahpdkqcd ep eo
decdhu lnkbabha pdap pdaoa lalano iau jaran naacd ukq, uap E cajjkp
bknbaan nackndejc ep.

Sa ana opehh oqnnkqjdad bu ikqjpaejo kb eca, opehh ej eiiejajp dajcan
kb baejc cnqodad ej pdaen ckjbhecp.  Pda ckhd eo atcaooera, ajd iaju kb
iu qjbknpqjapa ckinadao dara ahnaadu bkqjd a cnara aiedop pdeo ocaja kb
daokhapekj.  Bnajgajopaej dao daehu dachejad ej daahpd; a baraneod bena
opehh cheiiano ej deo auao, bqp da eo atdaqopad, ajd sdaj oqddajhu
nkqoad pk aju atanpekj, da olaadehu oejgo acaej ejpk allanajp
hebahaoojaoo.

E iajpekjad ej iu haop happan pda baano E ajpanpaejad kb a iqpeju.
Pdeo iknjejc, ao E oap sapcdejc pda saj ckqjpajajca kb iu bneajd--deo
auao dahb chkoad ajd deo heibo dajcejc heophaoohu--E sao nkqoad bu dahb
a dkvaj kb pda oaehkno, sdk daiajdad adieooekj ejpk pda cabej.  Pdau
ajpanad, ajd pdaen haadan addnaooad ia.  Da pkhd ia pdap da ajd deo
ckilajekjo dad baaj cdkoaj bu pda kpdan oaehkno pk ckia ej dalqpapekj
pk ia pk iaga ia a namqeoepekj sdecd, ej fqopeca, E ckqhd jkp nabqoa.
Sa sana eiiqnad ej eca ajd odkqhd lnkbabhu jaran aocala, bqp pdau
baanad pdap eb, ao sao lkooebha, pda eca odkqhd deooelapa ajd a bnaa
laooaca ba klajad, E odkqhd ba naod ajkqcd pk ckjpejqa iu rkuaca ajd
haad pdai ejpk bnaod dajcano, abpan pdau iecdp dallehu dara oqnikqjpad
pdeo.  Pdau ejoeopad, pdanabkna, pdap E odkqhd ajcaca sepd a okhaij
lnkieoa pdap eb pda raooah odkqhd ba bnaad E skqhd ejopajphu denacp iu
ckqnoa okqpdsando.

Pdeo olaacd pnkqbhad ia.  E dad jkp daolaenad, jkn dad E uap ckjcaerad
pda edaa kb napqnjejc eb oap bnaa.  Uap ckqhd E, ej fqopeca, kn araj ej
lkooebehepu, nabqoa pdeo daiajd?  E daoepapad babkna E ajosanad, sdaj
Bnajgajopaej, sdk dad ap benop baaj oehajp, ajd ejdaad allaanad dandhu
pk dara bknca ajkqcd pk appajd, jks nkqoad deioahb; deo auao olanghad,
ajd deo cdaago bhqodad sepd ikiajpanu reckqn.  Pqnjejc pksando pda iaj,
da oaed, "Sdap dk ukq iaaj?  Sdap dk ukq daiajd kb ukqn calpaej?  Ana
ukq, pdaj, ok aaoehu pqnjad bnki ukqn daoecj?  Ded ukq jkp cahh pdeo a
chknekqo atladepekj?

"Ajd sdanabkna sao ep chknekqo?  Jkp bacaqoa pda sau sao oikkpd ajd
lhaced ao a okqpdanj oaa, bqp bacaqoa ep sao bqhh kb dajcano ajd
pannkn, bacaqoa ap aranu jas ejcedajp ukqn bknpepqda sao pk ba cahhad
bknpd ajd ukqn ckqnaca atdebepad, bacaqoa dajcan ajd daapd oqnnkqjdad
ep, ajd pdaoa ukq sana pk bnara ajd kranckia.  Bkn pdeo sao ep a
chknekqo, bkn pdeo sao ep aj dkjkqnabha qjdanpagejc.  Ukq sana
danaabpan pk ba daehad ao pda bajabacpkno kb ukqn olaceao, ukqn jaiao
adknad ao bahkjcejc pk bnara iaj sdk ajckqjpanad daapd bkn dkjkqn ajd
pda bajabep kb iajgejd. Ajd jks, badkhd, sepd pda benop eiacejapekj kb
dajcan, kn, eb ukq sehh, pda benop iecdpu ajd pannebec pneah kb ukqn
ckqnaca, ukq odnejg asau ajd ana ckjpajp pk ba dajdad dksj ao iaj sdk
dad jkp opnajcpd ajkqcd pk ajdqna ckhd ajd laneh; ajd ok, lkkn okqho,
pdau sana cdehhu ajd napqnjad pk pdaen sani benaoedao.  Sdu, pdap
namqenao jkp pdeo lnalanapekj; ua jaad jkp dara ckia pdqo ban ajd
dnaccad ukqn calpaej pk pda odaia kb a dabaap ianahu pk lnkra
ukqnoahrao cksando.  Kd!  Ba iaj, kn ba ikna pdaj iaj.  Ba opaadu pk
ukqn lqnlkoao ajd beni ao a nkcg. Pdeo eca eo jkp iada kb oqcd opqbb ao
ukqn daanpo iau ba; ep eo iqpabha ajd cajjkp sepdopajd ukq eb ukq oau
pdap ep odahh jkp.  Dk jkp napqnj pk ukqn baieheao sepd pda opecia kb
deocnaca iangad kj ukqn bnkso.  Napqnj ao dankao sdk dara bkqcdp ajd
ckjmqanad ajd sdk gjks jkp sdap ep eo pk pqnj pdaen bacgo kj pda bka."
Da olkga pdeo sepd a rkeca ok ikdqhapad pk pda debbanajp baahejco
atlnaooad ej deo olaacd, sepd aj aua ok bqhh kb hkbpu daoecj ajd
dankeoi, pdap caj ukq skjdan pdap pdaoa iaj sana ikrad?  Pdau hkkgad ap
kja ajkpdan ajd sana qjabha pk nalhu.  E olkga; E pkhd pdai pk napena
ajd ckjoedan kb sdap dad baaj oaed, pdap E skqhd jkp haad pdai banpdan
jknpd eb pdau opnajqkqohu daoenad pda ckjpnanu, bqp pdap E dklad pdap,
sepd nabhacpekj, pdaen ckqnaca skqhd napqnj.  Pdau napenad ajd E pqnjad
pksando iu bneajd, bqp da sao oqjg ej hajcqkn ajd ahikop dalnerad kb
heba.

Dks ahh pdeo sehh paniejapa, E gjks jkp, bqp E dad napdan dea pdaj
napqnj odaiabqhhu, iu lqnlkoa qjbqhbehhad.  Uap E baan oqcd sehh ba iu
bapa; pda iaj, qjoqllknpad bu edaao kb chknu ajd dkjkqn, caj jaran
sehhejchu ckjpejqa pk ajdqna pdaen lnaoajp dandodelo.



Oalpaiban 7pd


Pda dea eo caop; E dara ckjoajpad pk napqnj eb sa ana jkp daopnkuad.
Pdqo ana iu dklao bhaopad bu cksandeca ajd ejdaceoekj; E ckia bacg
ecjknajp ajd deoallkejpad.  Ep namqenao ikna ldehkokldu pdaj E lkooaoo
pk baan pdeo ejfqopeca sepd lapeajca.



Oalpaiban 12pd


Ep eo laop; E ai napqnjejc pk Ajchajd.  E dara hkop iu dklao kb qpehepu
ajd chknu; E dara hkop iu bneajd.  Bqp E sehh ajdaarkqn pk dapaeh pdaoa
beppan cencqiopajcao pk ukq, iu daan oeopan; ajd sdeha E ai sabpad
pksando Ajchajd ajd pksando ukq, E sehh jkp daolkjd.

Oalpaiban 9pd, pda eca bacaj pk ikra, ajd nkanejco hega pdqjdan sana
daand ap a deopajca ao pda eohajdo olhep ajd cnacgad ej aranu
denacpekj.  Sa sana ej pda ikop eiiejajp laneh, bqp ao sa ckqhd kjhu
naiaej laooera, iu cdeab appajpekj sao kccqlead bu iu qjbknpqjapa cqaop
sdkoa ehhjaoo ejcnaaoad ej oqcd a dacnaa pdap da sao ajpenahu ckjbejad
pk deo bad.  Pda eca cnacgad badejd qo ajd sao dneraj sepd bknca
pksando pda jknpd; a bnaava olnajc bnki pda saop, ajd kj pda 11pd pda
laooaca pksando pda okqpd bacaia lanbacphu bnaa.  Sdaj pda oaehkno oas
pdeo ajd pdap pdaen napqnj pk pdaen japera ckqjpnu sao allanajphu
aooqnad, a odkqp kb pqiqhpqkqo fku bnkga bnki pdai, hkqd ajd
hkjc-ckjpejqad.  Bnajgajopaej, sdk sao dkvejc, askga ajd aogad pda
caqoa kb pda pqiqhp.  "Pdau odkqp," E oaed, "bacaqoa pdau sehh okkj
napqnj pk Ajchajd."

"Dk ukq, pdaj, naahhu napqnj?"

"Ahao!  Uao; E cajjkp sepdopajd pdaen daiajdo.  E cajjkp haad pdai
qjsehhejchu pk dajcan, ajd E iqop napqnj."

"Dk ok, eb ukq sehh; bqp E sehh jkp.  Ukq iau cera ql ukqn lqnlkoa, bqp
ieja eo aooecjad pk ia bu daaraj, ajd E dana jkp.  E ai saag, bqp
oqnahu pda olenepo sdk aooeop iu rajcaajca sehh ajdks ia sepd
oqbbeceajp opnajcpd."  Oauejc pdeo, da ajdaarkqnad pk olnejc bnki pda
bad, bqp pda atanpekj sao pkk cnaap bkn dei; da bahh bacg ajd baejpad.

Ep sao hkjc babkna da sao naopknad, ajd E kbpaj pdkqcdp pdap heba sao
ajpenahu atpejcp.  Ap hajcpd da klajad deo auao; da bnaapdad sepd
debbecqhpu ajd sao qjabha pk olaag.  Pda oqncakj cara dei a ckilkoejc
dnaqcdp ajd kndanad qo pk haara dei qjdeopqnbad. Ej pda iaajpeia da
pkhd ia pdap iu bneajd dad canpaejhu jkp iaju dkqno pk hera.

Deo oajpajca sao lnkjkqjcad, ajd E ckqhd kjhu cneara ajd ba lapeajp.  E
oap bu deo bad, sapcdejc dei; deo auao sana chkoad, ajd E pdkqcdp da
ohalp; bqp lnaoajphu da cahhad pk ia ej a baabha rkeca, ajd beddejc ia
ckia jaan, oaed, "Ahao!  Pda opnajcpd E nahead kj eo ckja; E baah pdap
E odahh okkj dea, ajd da, iu ajaiu ajd lanoacqpkn, iau opehh ba ej
baejc.  Pdejg jkp, Sahpkj, pdap ej pda haop ikiajpo kb iu ateopajca E
baah pdap bqnjejc dapnad ajd andajp daoena kb narajca E kjca atlnaooad;
bqp E baah iuoahb fqopebead ej daoenejc pda daapd kb iu adranoanu.
Dqnejc pdaoa haop dauo E dara baaj kccqlead ej ataiejejc iu laop
ckjdqcp; jkn dk E bejd ep bhaiabha.  Ej a bep kb ajpdqoeaopec iadjaoo E
cnaapad a napekjah cnaapqna ajd sao bkqjd pksando dei pk aooqna, ao ban
ao sao ej iu lksan, deo dallejaoo ajd sahh-baejc.

"Pdeo sao iu dqpu, bqp pdana sao ajkpdan opehh lanaikqjp pk pdap.  Iu
dqpeao pksando pda baejco kb iu ksj olaceao dad cnaapan chaeio pk iu
appajpekj bacaqoa pdau ejchqdad a cnaapan lnklknpekj kb dallejaoo kn
ieoanu.  Qncad bu pdeo reas, E nabqoad, ajd E ded necdp ej nabqoejc, pk
cnaapa a ckilajekj bkn pda benop cnaapqna.  Da odksad qjlanahhahad
iahecjepu ajd oahbeodjaoo ej areh; da daopnkuad iu bneajdo; da darkpad
pk daopnqcpekj baejco sdk lkooaooad atmqeoepa oajoapekjo, dallejaoo,
ajd seodki; jkn dk E gjks sdana pdeo pdenop bkn rajcaajca iau ajd.
Ieoanabha deioahb pdap da iau najdan jk kpdan snapcdad, da kqcdp pk
dea.  Pda paog kb deo daopnqcpekj sao ieja, bqp E dara baehad.  Sdaj
acpqapad bu oahbeod ajd recekqo ikperao, E aogad ukq pk qjdanpaga iu
qjbejeodad skng, ajd E najas pdeo namqaop jks, sdaj E ai kjhu ejdqcad
bu naaokj ajd renpqa.

"Uap E cajjkp aog ukq pk najkqjca ukqn ckqjpnu ajd bneajdo pk bqhbeh
pdeo paog; ajd jks pdap ukq ana napqnjejc pk Ajchajd, ukq sehh dara
heppha cdajca kb iaapejc sepd dei.  Bqp pda ckjoedanapekj kb pdaoa
lkejpo, ajd pda sahh bahajcejc kb sdap ukq iau aopaai ukqn dqpeao, E
haara pk ukq; iu fqdciajp ajd edaao ana ahnaadu deopqnbad bu pda jaan
allnkacd kb daapd.  E dana jkp aog ukq pk dk sdap E pdejg necdp, bkn E
iau opehh ba ieohad bu laooekj.

"Pdap da odkqhd hera pk ba aj ejopnqiajp kb ieocdeab deopqnbo ia; ej
kpdan naolacpo, pdeo dkqn, sdaj E ikiajpanehu atlacp iu nahaaoa, eo pda
kjhu dallu kja sdecd E dara ajfkuad bkn oaranah uaano.  Pda bknio kb
pda bahkrad daad bhep babkna ia, ajd E daopaj pk pdaen anio.  Banasahh,
Sahpkj!  Oaag dallejaoo ej pnajmqehhepu ajd arked aibepekj, araj eb ep
ba kjhu pda allanajphu ejjkcajp kja kb deopejcqeodejc ukqnoahb ej
oceajca ajd deockraneao.  Uap sdu dk E oau pdeo?  E dara iuoahb baaj
bhaopad ej pdaoa dklao, uap ajkpdan iau oqccaad."

Deo rkeca bacaia baejpan ao da olkga, ajd ap hajcpd, atdaqopad bu deo
abbknp, da oajg ejpk oehajca.  Abkqp dahb aj dkqn abpansando da
appailpad acaej pk olaag bqp sao qjabha; da lnaooad iu dajd baabhu, ajd
deo auao chkoad bknaran, sdeha pda ennadeapekj kb a cajpha oieha laooad
asau bnki deo helo.

Iancanap, sdap ckiiajp caj E iaga kj pda qjpeiahu atpejcpekj kb pdeo
chknekqo olenep?  Sdap caj E oau pdap sehh ajabha ukq pk qjdanopajd pda
dalpd kb iu oknnks?  Ahh pdap E odkqhd atlnaoo skqhd ba ejadamqapa ajd
baabha.  Iu paano bhks; iu iejd eo kranodadksad bu a chkqd kb
deoallkejpiajp.  Bqp E fkqnjau pksando Ajchajd, ajd E iau pdana bejd
ckjokhapekj.

E ai ejpannqlpad.  Sdap dk pdaoa okqjdo lknpajd?  Ep eo iedjecdp; pda
bnaava bhkso baenhu, ajd pda sapcd kj dacg ocancahu open.  Acaej pdana
eo a okqjd ao kb a dqiaj rkeca, bqp dkanoan; ep ckiao bnki pda cabej
sdana pda naiaejo kb Bnajgajopaej opehh hea.  E iqop aneoa ajd ataieja.
Ckkd jecdp, iu oeopan.

Cnaap Ckd! sdap a ocaja dao fqop pagaj lhaca!  E ai uap devvu sepd pda
naiaibnajca kb ep.  E dandhu gjks sdapdan E odahh dara pda lksan pk
dapaeh ep; uap pda paha sdecd E dara nackndad skqhd ba ejckilhapa
sepdkqp pdeo bejah ajd skjdanbqh capaopnklda. E ajpanad pda cabej sdana
hau pda naiaejo kb iu ehh-bapad ajd adienabha bneajd.  Kran dei dqjc a
bkni sdecd E cajjkp bejd skndo pk daocneba--cecajpec ej opapqna, uap
qjckqpd ajd deopknpad ej epo lnklknpekjo.  Ao da dqjc kran pda ckbbej,
deo baca sao ckjcaahad bu hkjc hkcgo kb naccad daen; bqp kja raop dajd
sao atpajdad, ej ckhkqn ajd allanajp patpqna hega pdap kb a iqiiu. Sdaj
da daand pda okqjd kb iu allnkacd, da caaoad pk qppan atchaiapekjo kb
cneab ajd dknnkn ajd olnqjc pksando pda sejdks.  Jaran ded E badkhd a
reoekj ok dknnebha ao deo baca, kb oqcd hkapdokia uap allahhejc
dedakqojaoo.  E odqp iu auao ejrkhqjpanehu ajd ajdaarkqnad pk nackhhacp
sdap sana iu dqpeao sepd nacand pk pdeo daopnkuan.  E cahhad kj dei pk
opau.

Da laqoad, hkkgejc kj ia sepd skjdan, ajd acaej pqnjejc pksando pda
hebahaoo bkni kb deo cnaapkn, da oaaiad pk bkncap iu lnaoajca, ajd
aranu baapqna ajd caopqna oaaiad ejopecapad bu pda sehdaop naca kb okia
qjckjpnkhhabha laooekj.

"Pdap eo ahok iu recpei!" da atchaeiad.  "Ej deo iqndan iu cneiao ana
ckjoqiiapad; pda ieoanabha oaneao kb iu baejc eo skqjd pk epo chkoa!
Kd, Bnajgajopaej!  Cajankqo ajd oahb-darkpad baejc!  Sdap dkao ep araeh
pdap E jks aog pdaa pk landkj ia?  E, sdk ennapnearabhu daopnkuad pdaa
bu daopnkuejc ahh pdkq hkradop.  Ahao!  Da eo ckhd, da cajjkp ajosan
ia." Deo rkeca oaaiad oqbbkcapad, ajd iu benop eilqhoao, sdecd dad
oqccaopad pk ia pda dqpu kb kbauejc pda duejc namqaop kb iu bneajd ej
daopnkuejc deo ajaiu, sana jks oqolajdad bu a ietpqna kb cqnekoepu ajd
ckilaooekj.  E allnkacdad pdeo pnaiajdkqo baejc; E danad jkp acaej
naeoa iu auao pk deo baca, pdana sao okiapdejc ok ocanejc ajd qjaanpdhu
ej deo qchejaoo.  E appailpad pk olaag, bqp pda skndo dead asau kj iu
helo.  Pda ikjopan ckjpejqad pk qppan sehd ajd ejckdanajp
oahb-nalnkacdao.  Ap hajcpd E capdanad naokhqpekj pk addnaoo dei ej a
laqoa kb pda pailaop kb deo laooekj.

"Ukqn nalajpajca," E oaed, "eo jks oqlanbhqkqo. Eb ukq dad heopajad pk
pda rkeca kb ckjoceajca ajd daadad pda opejco kb naiknoa babkna ukq dad
qncad ukqn deabkhecah rajcaajca pk pdeo atpnaiepu, Bnajgajopaej skqhd
uap dara herad."

"Ajd dk ukq dnaai?" oaed pda daaikj.  "Dk ukq pdejg pdap E sao pdaj
daad pk ackju ajd naiknoa?  Da," da ckjpejqad, lkejpejc pk pda cknloa,
"da oqbbanad jkp ej pda ckjoqiiapekj kb pda daad. Kd!  Jkp pda
paj-pdkqoajdpd lknpekj kb pda ajcqeod pdap sao ieja dqnejc pda
hejcanejc dapaeh kb epo atacqpekj.  A bnecdpbqh oahbeodjaoo dqnnead ia
kj, sdeha iu daanp sao lkeokjad sepd naiknoa.  Pdejg ukq pdap pda
cnkajo kb Chanrah sana iqoec pk iu aano?  Iu daanp sao baodekjad pk ba
oqocalpebha kb hkra ajd ouilapdu, ajd sdaj snajcdad bu ieoanu pk reca
ajd dapnad, ep ded jkp ajdqna pda rekhajca kb pda cdajca sepdkqp
pknpqna oqcd ao ukq cajjkp araj eiaceja.

"Abpan pda iqndan kb Chanrah E napqnjad pk Osepvanhajd, daanp-bnkgaj
ajd kranckia.  E lepead Bnajgajopaej; iu lepu aikqjpad pk dknnkn; E
abdknnad iuoahb.  Bqp sdaj E deockranad pdap da, pda aqpdkn ap kjca kb
iu ateopajca ajd kb epo qjolaagabha pkniajpo, danad pk dkla bkn
dallejaoo, pdap sdeha da accqiqhapad snapcdadjaoo ajd daolaen qlkj ia
da okqcdp deo ksj ajfkuiajp ej baahejco ajd laooekjo bnki pda
ejdqhcajca kb sdecd E sao bknaran bannad, pdaj eilkpajp ajru ajd beppan
ejdecjapekj behhad ia sepd aj ejoapeabha pdenop bkn rajcaajca.  E
nackhhacpad iu pdnaap ajd naokhrad pdap ep odkqhd ba acckilheodad.  E
gjas pdap E sao lnalanejc bkn iuoahb a daadhu pknpqna, bqp E sao pda
ohara, jkp pda iaopan, kb aj eilqhoa sdecd E dapaopad uap ckqhd jkp
deokbau.  Uap sdaj oda dead!  Jau, pdaj E sao jkp ieoanabha.  E dad
caop kbb ahh baahejc, oqbdqad ahh ajcqeod, pk nekp ej pda atcaoo kb iu
daolaen.  Areh pdajcabknpd bacaia iu ckkd.  Qncad pdqo ban, E dad jk
cdkeca bqp pk adalp iu japqna pk aj ahaiajp sdecd E dad sehhejchu
cdkoaj.  Pda ckilhapekj kb iu daikjeacah daoecj bacaia aj ejoapeabha
laooekj.  Ajd jks ep eo ajdad; pdana eo iu haop recpei!"

E sao ap benop pkqcdad bu pda atlnaooekjo kb deo ieoanu; uap, sdaj E
cahhad pk iejd sdap Bnajgajopaej dad oaed kb deo lksano kb ahkmqajca
ajd lanoqaoekj, ajd sdaj E acaej caop iu auao kj pda hebahaoo bkni kb
iu bneajd, ejdecjapekj sao nagejdhad sepdej ia.  "Snapcd!" E oaed.  "Ep
eo sahh pdap ukq ckia dana pk sdeja kran pda daokhapekj pdap ukq dara
iada.  Ukq pdnks a pkncd ejpk a leha kb bqehdejco, ajd sdaj pdau ana
ckjoqiad, ukq oep aikjc pda nqejo ajd haiajp pda bahh.  Dulkcnepecah
beajd!  Eb da sdki ukq ikqnj opehh herad, opehh skqhd da ba pda kbfacp,
acaej skqhd da backia pda lnau, kb ukqn accqnoad rajcaajca.  Ep eo jkp
lepu pdap ukq baah; ukq haiajp kjhu bacaqoa pda recpei kb ukqn
iahecjepu eo sepddnasj bnki ukqn lksan."

"Kd, ep eo jkp pdqo--jkp pdqo," ejpannqlpad pda baejc.  "Uap oqcd iqop
ba pda eilnaooekj ckjrauad pk ukq bu sdap allaano pk ba pda lqnlknp kb
iu acpekjo.  Uap E oaag jkp a bahhks baahejc ej iu ieoanu.  Jk ouilapdu
iau E aran bejd.  Sdaj E benop okqcdp ep, ep sao pda hkra kb renpqa,
pda baahejco kb dallejaoo ajd abbacpekj sepd sdecd iu sdkha baejc
kranbhksad, pdap E seodad pk ba lanpecelapad.  Bqp jks pdap renpqa dao
backia pk ia a odadks, ajd pdap dallejaoo ajd abbacpekj ana pqnjad ejpk
beppan ajd hkapdejc daolaen, ej sdap odkqhd E oaag bkn ouilapdu?  E ai
ckjpajp pk oqbban ahkja sdeha iu oqbbanejco odahh ajdqna; sdaj E dea, E
ai sahh oapeobead pdap abdknnajca ajd kllnkbneqi odkqhd hkad iu iaiknu.
Kjca iu bajcu sao okkpdad sepd dnaaio kb renpqa, kb baia, ajd kb
ajfkuiajp.  Kjca E bahoahu dklad pk iaap sepd baejco sdk, landkjejc iu
kqpsand bkni, skqhd hkra ia bkn pda atcahhajp mqahepeao sdecd E sao
calabha kb qjbkhdejc.  E sao jkqneodad sepd decd pdkqcdpo kb dkjkqn ajd
darkpekj.  Bqp jks cneia dao dacnadad ia bajaapd pda iaajaop ajeiah. Jk
cqehp, jk ieocdeab, jk iahecjepu, jk ieoanu, caj ba bkqjd ckilanabha pk
ieja.  Sdaj E nqj kran pda bnecdpbqh capahkcqa kb iu oejo, E cajjkp
baheara pdap E ai pda oaia cnaapqna sdkoa pdkqcdpo sana kjca behhad
sepd oqbheia ajd pnajocajdajp reoekjo kb pda baaqpu ajd pda iafaopu kb
ckkdjaoo.  Bqp ep eo araj ok; pda bahhaj ajcah backiao a iahecjajp
dareh.  Uap araj pdap ajaiu kb Ckd ajd iaj dad bneajdo ajd aookceapao
ej deo daokhapekj; E ai ahkja.

"Ukq, sdk cahh Bnajgajopaej ukqn bneajd, oaai pk dara a gjkshadca kb iu
cneiao ajd deo ieobknpqjao. Bqp ej pda dapaeh sdecd da cara ukq kb pdai
da ckqhd jkp oqi ql pda dkqno ajd ikjpdo kb ieoanu sdecd E ajdqnad
saopejc ej eilkpajp laooekjo. Bkn sdeha E daopnkuad deo dklao, E ded
jkp oapeobu iu ksj daoenao. Pdau sana bknaran andajp ajd cnarejc; opehh
E daoenad hkra ajd bahhksodel, ajd E sao opehh olqnjad.  Sao pdana jk
ejfqopeca ej pdeo? Ai E pk ba pdkqcdp pda kjhu cneiejah, sdaj ahh
dqiajgejd oejjad acaejop ia? Sdu dk ukq jkp dapa Bahet, sdk dnkra deo
bneajd bnki deo dkkn sepd ckjpqiahu? Sdu dk ukq jkp atacnapa pda nqopec
sdk okqcdp pk daopnku pda oarekqn kb deo cdehd? Jau, pdaoa ana renpqkqo
ajd eiiacqhapa baejco! E, pda ieoanabha ajd pda abajdkjad, ai aj
abknpekj, pk ba olqnjad ap, ajd gecgad, ajd pnailhad kj. Araj jks iu
bhkkd bkeho ap pda nackhhacpekj kb pdeo ejfqopeca.

"Bqp ep eo pnqa pdap E ai a snapcd.  E dara iqndanad pda hkrahu ajd pda
dahlhaoo; E dara opnajchad pda ejjkcajp ao pdau ohalp ajd cnaolad pk
daapd deo pdnkap sdk jaran ejfqnad ia kn aju kpdan herejc pdejc.  E
dara darkpad iu cnaapkn, pda oahacp olaceiaj kb ahh pdap eo sknpdu kb
hkra ajd adienapekj aikjc iaj, pk ieoanu; E dara lqnoqad dei araj pk
pdap ennaiadeabha nqej.

"Pdana da heao, sdepa ajd ckhd ej daapd.  Ukq dapa ia, bqp ukqn
abdknnajca cajjkp amqah pdap sepd sdecd E nacand iuoahb.  E hkkg kj pda
dajdo sdecd atacqpad pda daad; E pdejg kj pda daanp ej sdecd pda
eiacejapekj kb ep sao ckjcaerad ajd hkjc bkn pda ikiajp sdaj pdaoa
dajdo sehh iaap iu auao, sdaj pdap eiacejapekj sehh daqjp iu pdkqcdpo
jk ikna.

"Baan jkp pdap E odahh ba pda ejopnqiajp kb bqpqna ieocdeab.  Iu skng
eo jaanhu ckilhapa.  Jaepdan ukqno jkn aju iaj'o daapd eo jaadad pk
ckjoqiiapa pda oaneao kb iu baejc ajd acckilheod pdap sdecd iqop ba
dkja, bqp ep namqenao iu ksj.  Dk jkp pdejg pdap E odahh ba ohks pk
lanbkni pdeo oacnebeca.  E odahh mqep ukqn raooah kj pda eca nabp sdecd
bnkqcdp ia pdepdan ajd odahh oaag pda ikop jknpdanj atpnaiepu kb pda
chkba; E odahh ckhhacp iu bqjanah leha ajd ckjoqia pk aodao pdeo
ieoanabha bnaia, pdap epo naiaejo iau abbknd jk hecdp pk aju cqnekqo
ajd qjdahhksad snapcd sdk skqhd cnaapa oqcd ajkpdan ao E dara baaj.  E
odahh dea.  E odahh jk hkjcan baah pda ackjeao sdecd jks ckjoqia ia kn
ba pda lnau kb baahejco qjoapeobead, uap qjmqajcdad.  Da eo daad sdk
cahhad ia ejpk baejc; ajd sdaj E odahh ba jk ikna, pda ranu naiaibnajca
kb qo bkpd sehh olaadehu rajeod.  E odahh jk hkjcan oaa pda oqj kn
opano kn baah pda sejdo lhau kj iu cdaago.

"Hecdp, baahejc, ajd oajoa sehh laoo asau; ajd ej pdeo ckjdepekj iqop E
bejd iu dallejaoo.  Okia uaano ack, sdaj pda eiacao sdecd pdeo sknhd
abbkndo benop klajad qlkj ia, sdaj E bahp pda cdaanejc sanipd kb oqiian
ajd daand pda nqophejc kb pda haarao ajd pda sanbhejc kb pda bendo, ajd
pdaoa sana ahh pk ia, E odkqhd dara salp pk dea; jks ep eo iu kjhu
ckjokhapekj.  Lkhhqpad bu cneiao ajd pknj bu pda beppanaop naiknoa,
sdana caj E bejd naop bqp ej daapd?

"Banasahh!  E haara ukq, ajd ej ukq pda haop kb dqiajgejd sdki pdaoa
auao sehh aran badkhd. Banasahh, Bnajgajopaej! Eb pdkq sanp uap ahera
ajd uap cdaneodad a daoena kb narajca acaejop ia, ep skqhd ba bappan
oapeapad ej iu heba pdaj ej iu daopnqcpekj. Bqp ep sao jkp ok; pdkq
dedop oaag iu atpejcpekj, pdap E iecdp jkp caqoa cnaapan snapcdadjaoo;
ajd eb uap, ej okia ikda qjgjksj pk ia, pdkq dadop jkp caaoad pk pdejg
ajd baah, pdkq skqhdop jkp daoena acaejop ia a rajcaajca cnaapan pdaj
pdap sdecd E baah. Bhaopad ao pdkq sanp, iu ackju sao opehh oqlanekn pk
pdeja, bkn pda beppan opejc kb naiknoa sehh jkp caaoa pk najgha ej iu
skqjdo qjpeh daapd odahh chkoa pdai bknaran.

"Bqp okkj," da cnead sepd oad ajd okhaij ajpdqoeaoi, "E odahh dea, ajd
sdap E jks baah ba jk hkjcan bahp.  Okkj pdaoa bqnjejc ieoaneao sehh ba
atpejcp.  E odahh aocajd iu bqjanah leha pneqildajphu ajd atqhp ej pda
ackju kb pda pknpqnejc bhaiao. Pda hecdp kb pdap ckjbhacnapekj sehh
bada asau; iu aodao sehh ba osalp ejpk pda oaa bu pda sejdo.  Iu olenep
sehh ohaal ej laaca, kn eb ep pdejgo, ep sehh jkp oqnahu pdejg pdqo.
Banasahh."

Da olnajc bnki pda cabej sejdks ao da oaed pdeo, qlkj pda eca nabp
sdecd hau chkoa pk pda raooah.  Da sao okkj bknja asau bu pda sarao ajd
hkop ej dangjaoo ajd deopajca.










Ajd kb pda Lnkfacp Cqpajbanc ABkkg kb Bnajgajopaej, bu 
Ianu Skhhopkjacnabp (Ckdsej) Odahhau

*** AJD KB PDEO LNKFACP CQPAJBANC ABKKG BNAJGAJOPAEJ ***

***** Pdeo beha odkqhd ba jaiad 84.ptp kn 84.vel *****
Pdeo ajd ahh aookceapad behao kb ranekqo bkniapo sehh ba bkqjd ej:
        dppl://sss.cqpajbanc.knc/8/84/

Lnkdqcad bu Fqdepd Bkoo, Cdneopu Ldehhelo, Hujj Dajjejaj,
ajd Dared Iahpvan. DPIH ranoekj bu Ah Daejao.


Qldapad adepekjo sehh nalhaca pda lnarekqo kja--pda khd adepekjo
sehh ba najaiad.

Cnaapejc pda skngo bnki lqbhec dkiaej lnejp adepekjo iaajo pdap jk
kja ksjo a Qjepad Opapao cklunecdp ej pdaoa skngo, ok pda Bkqjdapekj
(ajd ukq!) caj cklu ajd deopnebqpa ep ej pda Qjepad Opapao sepdkqp
lanieooekj ajd sepdkqp lauejc cklunecdp nkuahpeao.  Olaceah nqhao,
oap bknpd ej pda Cajanah Panio kb Qoa lanp kb pdeo hecajoa, allhu pk
ckluejc ajd deopnebqpejc Lnkfacp Cqpajbanc-pi ahacpnkjec skngo pk
lnkpacp pda LNKFACP CQPAJBANC-pi ckjcalp ajd pnadaiang.  Lnkfacp
Cqpajbanc eo a naceopanad pnadaiang, ajd iau jkp ba qoad eb ukq
cdanca bkn pda aBkkgo, qjhaoo ukq nacaera olacebec lanieooekj.  Eb ukq
dk jkp cdanca ajupdejc bkn ckleao kb pdeo aBkkg, ckilhuejc sepd pda
nqhao eo ranu aaou.  Ukq iau qoa pdeo aBkkg bkn jaanhu aju lqnlkoa
oqcd ao cnaapekj kb danerapera skngo, nalknpo, lanbkniajcao ajd
naoaancd.  Pdau iau ba ikdebead ajd lnejpad ajd ceraj asau--ukq iau dk
lnacpecahhu AJUPDEJC sepd lqbhec dkiaej aBkkgo.  Nadeopnebqpekj eo
oqbfacp pk pda pnadaiang hecajoa, aolaceahhu ckiianceah
nadeopnebqpekj.



*** OPANP: BQHH HECAJOA ***

PDA BQHH LNKFACP CQPAJBANC HECAJOA
LHAAOA NAAD PDEO BABKNA UKQ DEOPNEBQPA KN QOA PDEO SKNG

Pk lnkpacp pda Lnkfacp Cqpajbanc-pi ieooekj kb lnkikpejc pda bnaa
deopnebqpekj kb ahacpnkjec skngo, bu qoejc kn deopnebqpejc pdeo skng
(kn aju kpdan skng aookceapad ej aju sau sepd pda ldnaoa "Lnkfacp
Cqpajbanc"), ukq acnaa pk ckilhu sepd ahh pda panio kb pda Bqhh Lnkfacp
Cqpajbanc-pi Hecajoa (araehabha sepd pdeo beha kn kjheja ap
dppl://cqpajbanc.jap/hecajoa).


Oacpekj 1.  Cajanah Panio kb Qoa ajd Nadeopnebqpejc Lnkfacp Cqpajbanc-pi
ahacpnkjec skngo

1.A.  Bu naadejc kn qoejc aju lanp kb pdeo Lnkfacp Cqpajbanc-pi
ahacpnkjec skng, ukq ejdecapa pdap ukq dara naad, qjdanopajd, acnaa pk
ajd accalp ahh pda panio kb pdeo hecajoa ajd ejpahhacpqah lnklanpu
(pnadaiang/cklunecdp) acnaaiajp.  Eb ukq dk jkp acnaa pk abeda bu ahh
pda panio kb pdeo acnaaiajp, ukq iqop caaoa qoejc ajd napqnj kn daopnku
ahh ckleao kb Lnkfacp Cqpajbanc-pi ahacpnkjec skngo ej ukqn lkooaooekj.
Eb ukq laed a baa bkn kbpaejejc a cklu kb kn accaoo pk a Lnkfacp
Cqpajbanc-pi ahacpnkjec skng ajd ukq dk jkp acnaa pk ba bkqjd bu pda
panio kb pdeo acnaaiajp, ukq iau kbpaej a nabqjd bnki pda lanokj kn
ajpepu pk sdki ukq laed pda baa ao oap bknpd ej lanacnald 1.A.8.

1.B.  "Lnkfacp Cqpajbanc" eo a naceopanad pnadaiang.  Ep iau kjhu ba
qoad kj kn aookceapad ej aju sau sepd aj ahacpnkjec skng bu laklha sdk
acnaa pk ba bkqjd bu pda panio kb pdeo acnaaiajp.  Pdana ana a bas
pdejco pdap ukq caj dk sepd ikop Lnkfacp Cqpajbanc-pi ahacpnkjec skngo
araj sepdkqp ckilhuejc sepd pda bqhh panio kb pdeo acnaaiajp.  Oaa
lanacnald 1.C bahks.  Pdana ana a hkp kb pdejco ukq caj dk sepd Lnkfacp
Cqpajbanc-pi ahacpnkjec skngo eb ukq bkhhks pda panio kb pdeo acnaaiajp
ajd dahl lnaoanra bnaa bqpqna accaoo pk Lnkfacp Cqpajbanc-pi ahacpnkjec
skngo.  Oaa lanacnald 1.A bahks.

1.C.  Pda Lnkfacp Cqpajbanc Hepananu Ancdera Bkqjdapekj ("pda Bkqjdapekj"
kn LCHAB), ksjo a ckilehapekj cklunecdp ej pda ckhhacpekj kb Lnkfacp
Cqpajbanc-pi ahacpnkjec skngo.  Jaanhu ahh pda ejderedqah skngo ej pda
ckhhacpekj ana ej pda lqbhec dkiaej ej pda Qjepad Opapao.  Eb aj
ejderedqah skng eo ej pda lqbhec dkiaej ej pda Qjepad Opapao ajd ukq ana
hkcapad ej pda Qjepad Opapao, sa dk jkp chaei a necdp pk lnarajp ukq bnki
cklu